
BOSTON 



PUET-'C 



LIBRiu-Y 






■ J HI! „, 



/ ' 



SMITHSONIAN 



YEAR 

 1965 





Smithsonian Year 

 1965 



ANNUAL REPORT OF THE 

 SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION FOR THE YEAR 

 ENDED JUNE 30, 1965, INCLUDING THE 

 FINANCIAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE 

 COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF REGENTS 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



Washington 1965 




With this, the first issue of the Annual Report of the Secretary of the Smith- 

 sonian Institution to appear under the general title THE SMITHSONIAN 

 YEAR, certain changes have been instituted in the procedures pertaining to 

 Smithsonian annual reports: 



1. The Annual Report of the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution (now 



THE SMITHSONIAN YEAR) will no longer be followed by the green- 

 bound volume containing the General Appendix of articles in the sciences 

 and the arts. The last of the old series is that for 1 964. 



2. The objectives of the General Appendix, according to present plans, will be 



met by an annual volume in the nature of a Smithsonian yearbook, an 

 anthology of distinguished and important contributions to the sciences and 

 the arts written by authorities in their fields and presented for the general 

 reader. The first of these yearbooks will appear in the spring of 1966 and 

 may be purchased. It will contain the eleven addresses delivered at the 

 scholarly sessions of the Smithson Bicentennial Celebration held in Wash- 

 ington in September 1965. 



3. The Report of the United States National Museum will no longer be issued 



initially as a separate document but incorporated in THE SMITH- 

 SONIAN YEAR together with the reports of the other branches of the 

 Smithsonian. Reprints of each of the agency reports will be available. 



SMITHSONIAN PUBLICATION 4648 




Contents 



Page 



The Establishment iv 



The Smithsonian Institution v 



Statement by the Secretary 1 



United States National Museum 19 



Museum of Natural History 23 



Research and Publications 31 



The Collections 86 



Exhibits 98 



Museum of History and Technology 105 



Research and Publications 110 



The Collections 124 



Exhibits 135 



Visitor Services 140 



International Exchange Service 145 



National Zoological Park 159 



Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 211 



National Collection of Fine Arts 245 



Freer Gallery of Art 265 



National Gallery of Art 287 



Canal Zone Biological Area 307 



National Air Museum 315 



John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts 327 



National Portrait Gallery 345 



Radiation Biology Laboratory 353 



Science Information Exchange 361 



National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board 367 



Smithsonian Museum Service 371 



Smithsonian Institution Library 377 



Publications and Information 389 



Report of the Executive Committee of the Board of Regents 403 



Staff of the Smithsonian Institution 429 




The Establishment 



Lyndon B. Johnson, President of the United States 

 Hubert H. Humphrey, Vice President of the United States 

 Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United States 

 Dean Rusk, Secretary of State 

 Henry H. Fowler, Secretary of the Treasury 

 Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of Defense 

 Nicholas de B. Katzenbach, Attorney General 

 John A. Gronouski, Postmaster General 

 Stewart L. Udall, Secretary of the Interior 

 Orville L. Freeman, Secretary of Agriculture 

 John T. Connor, Secretary of Commerce 

 W. Willard Wirtz, Secretary of Labor 

 Anthony J. Celebrezze, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare 



The Smithsonian Institution was created by act of Congress in 

 1846, in accordance with the terms of the will of James Smithson, 

 of England, who in 1 826 bequeathed his property to the United 

 States of America "to found at Washington, under the name 

 of the Smithsonian Institution, an establishment for the increase 

 and diffusion of knowledge among men." In receiving the 

 property and accepting the trust, Congress determined that the 

 Federal Government was without authority to administer the 

 trust directly, and, therefore, constituted an "establishment," 

 whose statutory members are "the President, the Vice President, 

 the Chief Justice, and the heads of the executive departments." 




The Smithsonian Institution 

 June 30, 1965 



Presiding officer ex officio 



Chancellor 



Regents of the Institution 



Executive Committee 



Secretary 



Assistant Secretaries 



Lyndon B. Johnson, President of the United 

 States 



Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United 

 States 



Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United 

 States, Chancellor 



Hubert H. Humphrey, Vice President of the 

 United States 



Clinton P. Anderson, Member of the Senate 



J. William Fulbright, Member of the Senate 



Leverett Saltonstall, Member of the Senate 



Frank T. Bow, Member of the House of 

 Representatives 



Michael J. Kirwan, Member of the House of 

 Representatives 



George H. Mahon, Member of the House of 

 Representatives 



John Nicholas Brown, citizen of Rhode Island 



William A. M. Burden, citizen of New York 



Robert V. Fleming, citizen of Washington, 

 D.C. 



Crawford H. Greenewalt, citizen of Dela- 

 ware 



Caryl P. Haskins, citizen of Washington, D.C. 



Jerome C. Hunsaker, citizen of Massachusetts 



Robert V. Fleming, Chairman, Clinton P. 

 Anderson, Caryl P. Haskins 



S. Dillon Ripley 



James Bradley, Assistant Secretary (Admin- 

 istration) 



T. Dale Stewart, Acting Assistant Secretary 

 (Science) 





Statement by the Secretary 





Music on the Mall for summer visitors to Washington and the Smithsonian 

 is heralded by tower music — trumpets playing on the north portico of the 

 Smithsonian Building. 




An audience of 12,000 at a Music on the Mall concert in summer 1965 heard 

 the National Symphony Orchestra, under Howard Mitchell, play Aaron 

 Copeland's Lincoln Portrait. The late Ambassador to the United Nations, 

 Adlai E. Stevenson, was narrator. 






Statement by the Secretary 

 S. Dillon Ripley 



In presenting this report in the year 1965, which marks the two- 

 hundredth anniversary of the birth of James Smithson, it is 

 appropriate to turn back to some of the thoughts of Joseph 

 Henry, the first Secretary, who labored to make the Institution 

 truly a center for "enlarging the bounds of human thought." 

 This year it has been my privilege, representing the Institution, 

 to testify before a Congressional Subcommittee on Science, 

 Research, and Development on the subject of the National 

 Science Foundation. One of the topics of that testimony was 

 the increasing need for supporting basic rather than applied 

 research. In 1854 Professor Henry was much concerned about 

 the state of the increase of knowledge in America, one of the 

 foundation stones of James Smithson's famous will. Joseph 

 Henry felt that comparatively little encouragement was being 

 given to the "increase" of knowledge. As he wrote: "As soon 

 as any branch of science can be brought to bear on the neces- 

 sities, conveniences, or luxuries of life, it meets with encourage- 

 ment and reward. Not so with the discovery of the incipient 

 principles of science. The investigations which lead to these 

 receive no fostering care from government, and are considered 

 by the superficial observer as trifles unworthy the attention of 

 those who place the supreme good in that which immediately 

 administers to the physical necessities or luxuries of life." 



As he further stated, the Institution has "two fundamental 

 maxims ... to do nothing with its funds which can equally 

 well be done by other means; and, second, to produce results 

 which, as far as possible, will benefit mankind in general" 

 (hence our interest in basic research). What then are the ac- 

 tivities with which the Smithsonian staff feels it can primarily 

 concern itself and what have been some of the results in the past 

 year? 



1 



789-427—66 3 




2 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



In the science field noteworthy activities of the Museum of 

 Natural History staff included the following : 



In a paper to be published in a forthcoming issue of Deep Sea 

 Research the first occurrence of a deepwater coral structure out- 

 side of the North Atlantic is recorded. This structure was dis- 

 covered by Dr. Donald F. Squires in the Sub-Antarctic Islands 

 of New Zealand while he was cooperating with the New Zealand 

 Oceanographic Institute's oceanographic program in that region. 

 Coupling his knowledge of living coral structures of the eastern 

 coast of the United States with study of the deepwater fossil 

 structure in New Zealand, Dr. Squires was able to postulate 

 sequences in the development of the coral structure. Stages of 

 development lead from a colony of coral up to several meters in 

 diameter through the accumulation of dead skeletal material and 

 living animals in distinctive communities to form a coral bank 

 several kilometers in diameter and as high as 50-60 meters. 

 Intermediate stages of development, termed "thicket" and 

 "coppice," have been identified in the fossil record. 



Several important scientific discoveries were made by the 

 department of mineral sciences during the past year. These 

 include the discovery by Dr. Kurt Fredriksson, division of 

 meteorites, of a glass with inclusions of metallic nickel-iron in 

 the Chainpur chondrite. This discovery, which was studied in 

 detail with the division's new electron microprobe, is of funda- 

 mental importance in determining the origin of chondrules and 

 of chondritic meteorities in general. 



As part of a cooperative study with Woods Hole and Scripps 

 Oceanographic Institutions, Dr. William G. Melson of the divi- 

 sion of petrology discovered metabasalts in ocean dredge 

 samples from the Mid- Atlantic Ridge. Such rocks may require 

 modifications of existing theories about the origin of the Mid- 

 Atlantic Ridge, and about processes of rock formation beneath 

 the sea floor. 



While participating in the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian 

 Biological Survey of Dominica, entomologist Paul Spangler dis- 

 covered for the first time the presence on the island of the snail 

 Planorbina glabrata (Say), the intermediate host of the principal 

 helminthic disease of man, schistosomiasis. 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 3 



In a study of yucca moths, Dr. Donald R. Davis has proved 

 beyond doubt the close relationship between agave and yucca 

 through the habits of the moths. The two genera of plants have 

 always been placed in two families, but the evidence concerning 

 the moths suggests that the two genera of plants should be 

 associated in one. 



In a study of material collected on the mid-Pacific Island of 

 Rapa, Dr. J. F. Gates Clarke has found that an ancient connec- 

 tion between the fauna of Rapa with those of Australia, New 

 Zealand, and South Africa is apparent. 



In the area of anthropology Dr. K. V. Flannery's preliminary 

 research in the Valley of Oaxaca, southern Mexico, has verified 

 the presence in many of the caves and rockshelters of abundant 

 perishable remains of human occupation, and has determined 

 that the corn cobs, cactus fruits, fragments of squash, etc., and 

 associated artifacts came from the period 6500-2500 B.C. 

 During this time the development of domesticated plants and 

 of techniques for growing them provided the basis of the all 

 important change to settled village life, rapid population growth, 

 and increasingly complex socioeconomic and religious systems. 

 Thus Oaxaca joins a few other localities in Mexico in developing 

 the prerequisities of civilization as we presently are inclined to 

 describe it. 



Dr. W. H. Crocker continued his field work among the Canela 

 Indians of Brazil. He found that under the pressure of expand- 

 ing non-Indian settlement and the destruction of their simple 

 way of life, they were experiencing a messianic movement, led 

 by a prophetess whom he was able to study at first hand. Rarely 

 has a social scientist been able to observe at close quarters the 

 social, psychological, and ecological revolution that a people 

 undergoes with the impact of shattering external contacts — a 

 microcosm of much of the upheaval today throughout the 

 world's developing nations. 



For more than 19 years the Smithsonian has administered the 

 Panama Canal Zone Biological area, whose scientists are engaged 

 primarily in behavioral and ecological studies. Four Smith- 

 sonian staff members are currently employed. Dr. Martin 

 Moynihan is investigating the evolution of behavior in New 

 World primates and passerines, particularly the evolution of 




4 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



social signal systems. Dr. Robert Dressier is continuing his 

 work on the pollination relationships among the New World 

 orchids. Dr. Neal Smith is studying the evolution and genetics 

 of egg-mimicry in parasitic cuckoos, and has initiated a study of 

 avian species diversity in tropical grasslands. The newest 

 member of the staff, Dr. Stanley Rand, is continuing his studies 

 on the ecology of iguanid lizards and has begun investigating 

 the role of vocalizations in the social organization of certain 

 neotropical frogs. 



The Institution's Radiation Biology Laboratory investigates 

 the direct effects upon, or the indirect control of the functions of, 

 living organisms by radiation. One of the significant achieve- 

 ments has been the development of instrumentation to measure 

 the spectral quality of sunlight, in 1 00-millimicron bands, from 

 sunrise to sunset throughout the year. The data that are being 

 accumulated by means of this instrumentation have been cited 

 as urgently needed by biologists who deal with light as an 

 environmental factor. Advances have been made in other areas 

 of the research program, such as additional information toward 

 determining the chemical structure of polyphosphate com- 

 pounds in marine organisms and algae, the light-stimulated 

 metabolism of sugars in plant development, and improved 

 techniques for removing radioactive radon from carbon-dating 

 samples so that samples may be counted without the 30-day 

 delay previously necessary. 



During the past year's work at the Smithsonian's Astrophysical 

 Observatory satellite-tracking data from the Baker-Nunn 

 cameras at the 12 astrophysical observing stations were used to 

 make more accurate determinations of the gravitational poten- 

 tial of the earth, and of the station positions. Analyses of 

 atmospheric drag on satellites and the atmospheric variations 

 deduced from it have been completed for half a solar cycle from 

 the maximum of solar activity during the International Geo- 

 physical Year through the minimum during the International 

 Year of the Quiet Sun. Baker-Nunn photographs of comets 

 are being reduced in studies of tail motions and brightness as a 

 function of solar activity. The camera network also continues to 

 observe flare stars. The Prairie Network of automatic cameras 

 for simultaneous photography of very bright meteors went into 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 5 



full operation this year and has already collected significant 

 data. The Harvard-Smithsonian Meteor Radar Network has 

 been improved to achieve greater sensitivity and accuracy. 

 Observations of artificial meteors launched from Wallops 

 Island have been made, and the data are being reduced. New 

 measurements of radioactive and stable isotopes in meteorites 

 and in dust samples from the Greenland Ice-Cap and elsewhere 

 have been carried out. In theoretical astrophysics, studies of 

 stellar atmospheres and of very massive and very dense systems 

 continue. Of the observatory's flight experiments, the proto- 

 type of Project Celescope is undergoing environmental testing 

 while flight hardware is being constructed, a spark-chamber for 

 detection of gamma rays during balloon flights has been fabri- 

 cated and is now being tested and calibrated. 



In American studies, a wide variety of techniques were 

 employed in field, laboratory, and library to advance the research 

 program of the Museum of History and Technology. Among the 

 year's accomplishments have been the perfection of underwater 

 surveying and measuring methods by Mendel L. Peterson in 

 exploring a late 16th-century shipwreck off Bermuda; the use 

 of tape recorder and camera by Mr. and Mrs. C. Malcolm 

 Watkins in recording the survival of folk potterymaking in 

 Moore County, North Carolina; and the completion of a 700- 

 page manuscript, The Origins of Chemistry, based upon studies of 

 archival and printed sources, by Dr. Robert P. Multhauf. In 

 addition, John C. Ewers has prepared a book, Artists of the Old 

 West, profusely illustrated with reproductions in black-and-white 

 and color of historically significant drawings and paintings 

 from museum collections of the United States, Canada, and 

 Europe. 



A hallmark of the Smithsonian's research enterprise is that it 

 draws upon a highly diverse community of scholars whose con- 

 certed efforts can transcend narrow disciplinary approaches to 

 learning. It undertakes to pursue those courses of investigation 

 uniquely suited to its institutional character, especially those 

 which illuminate the ways in which diverse areas of knowledge 

 are interdependent. An example of this lies in the character 

 and collections of the Freer Gallery of Art. As always, research 

 has been the primary activity. Man's history and culture; the 




6 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



organization of life ; the nature of the universe : these are time- 

 less questions. For more than a century they have been the 

 central concerns of Smithsonian research. 



The major joint effort this past year, occupying three Freer 

 staff members, has been devoted to the final stages of the cata- 

 logue of Chinese ceremonial bronzes which has been in prepara- 

 tion for some time. Individual projects range through such 

 diverse fields as History of Pigments and Coloring Materials, 

 Biographical Studies of Chinese Painters, Buddhist Wall Paint- 

 ings in Afghanistan, Yamatoe Painting and Design in Japan, 

 Dionysiac Elements in Sasanian Art, and Early Distribution 

 of Chinese and Japanese Porcelain in World Trade. The 

 traditional close collaboration with the University of Michigan 

 in the teaching of oriental art has been maintained; and two 

 curators have taught regularly scheduled courses at the New York 

 University and Johns Hopkins University. A Freer staff member 

 has been active on the American committee planning the great 

 exhibition to be sent to this country by the Japanese Govern- 

 ment in the coming year and has also supervised the preparation 

 of the catalogue. 



The preceding are all examples of research in which part of 

 the staff happen to be concerning themselves. Much of this 

 research depends upon collections of objects which already 

 belong to the Smithsonian, those 57 million objects so often 

 referred to, that vast accretion. Some, like the original Wilkes 

 Exploring Expedition collections arrived fortuitously and were 

 thrust upon the Institution. Some, like insects from the Island 

 of Dominica recently collected, have been eagerly sought 

 after by Smithsonian scientists as evidence of the principles of 

 evolution. It should never be forgotten that the collections of 

 the Institution are intended for original investigation. The 

 Nation has no need of an attic as such, nor should any curator be 

 charged simply with housekeeping or janitorial tasks. 



In our efforts to maintain the levels of excellence to which the 

 Smithsonian justly lays claim we must demonstrate to the Nation 

 and to international scholarship our valid and continuing stew- 

 ardship of these collections through research. The technical 

 and learned staff of the Smithsonian cannot perform this notable 

 task alone. This is why this year we have issued the first "Re- 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 7 



search Opportunities" pamphlet, listing some of the many pos- 

 sibilities in undergraduate and summer programs, in graduate 

 studies, and in postdoctoral research available to the Nation's 

 students and scholars for study here. In this cause we are selfish. 

 We wish to replicate ourselves, to exhibit to others how many and 

 how intriguing are the avenues to the increase of knowledge 

 which lie within our doors. What greater pleasure could we 

 as scholars afford than to exhibit our collections, our objects as 

 source material for study? To open avenues to this study 

 should be our primary objective. To study objects is to return 

 to the original wellsprings, like the documents and manu- 

 scripts preserved in a library. The objects are our archives. 

 From them we can construct concepts about the very nature of 

 man himself and that "invisible wall which bounds the prison 

 of our knowledge." 



Without such a positive attitude toward our collections not 

 only will we never be through curating them but we will never 

 have properly evoked the knowledge which lies within our 

 grasp in their constructive study. Anthropologists know this. 

 The dwindling realms of primitive peoples, people who live on 

 a different scale and time from ourselves, have yielded up vast 

 storehouses of ethnography, some of which has revealed truths 

 about patterns of human life to students from the days of Powell 

 and Morgan to the more contemporary, Boas, Malinowski, and 

 Mead. Present-day anthropology is in a quandary about peoples 

 and social organization. How right were some of the earlier 

 theorists? Should the theories not be reexamined? One way 

 to do it, one way to reillumine the scene with vigor and new 

 intellectual clarity would be to reexamine the objects themselves. 

 The objects at least still exist, and most of the documents, 

 journals, and accounts that go with them. Social anthropolo- 

 gists of the future will be derelict in their duty to the whole 

 realm of social psychology and cultural evolution if they do not 

 turn again to the objects, the life formulae, which can speak to 

 them as surely as to any artist or sculptor. 



There is a relation, not tenuous, between the objects and the 

 thoughts they evoke and the most basic principles of education. 

 Somewhere in this unrealized, metaphysical half-world there 




8 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



may lie a key to the present baffling phenomenon to educators, 

 the problems of how to interest anyone in anything. 



Today, with our national hopes and goals in education, there 

 is a sense of urgency in this. As part of the President's war on 

 poverty and the Youth Opportunity and United Planning Or- 

 ganization campaigns, the Smithsonian has taken on over 100 

 youths in various summer programs of training opportunities. 

 In addition we have undertaken a voluntary Teacher Institute 

 for 50 social science instructors from a poverty area in order to 

 train these instructors in how to use the museums as teaching 

 tools. These are the areas of interest with which the Smith- 

 sonian should experiment. It may be that the Institution, as 

 well as museums in general, is especially qualified to develop 

 interests and technical skills in many young people who do not 

 respond to more conventional educational techniques. 



We hope that this year of the observance of the bicentennial of 

 James Smithson's birth will mark a reawakening of under- 

 standing of the role and the utility of the Smithsonian Institu- 

 tion in many areas little known to our people, in areas of re- 

 search, of the study of conservation, of knowledge of nature and 

 the atmosphere, of those dwindling populations of men whose 

 adjustment to their environment is radically different from our 

 own, of those dwindling populations of species of animals and 

 plants the world around that are becoming extinct often because 

 of relentless pressures unleashed by man himself. Finally, in the 

 world of creative art and expression the Smithsonian plays a 

 role in which historical studies become one, with recurring pat- 

 terns, with those which help to lay bare the mysteries of the 

 universe, and the life processes which make it up. The Smith- 

 sonian as it has grown and as it exists lays open a simple present 

 truth. There are no "two cultures." We are all, scientists and 

 historians, concerned with a common intellectual process, not 

 merely with concepts of it, involving a morphology of forms and 

 in the end a similar testimony to "the increase of knowledge." 



The Board of Regents 



The membership of the Board of Regents remained unchanged 

 except for the new Vice President of the United States, the 

 Honorable Hubert H. Humphrey, who became an ex officio 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 9 



member on January 20, 1965, filling the seat formerly occupied 

 by President Lyndon B. Johnson. The roll of Regents at the 

 close of the fiscal year was as follows: Chief Justice of the 

 United States Earl Warren, Chancellor; members from the 

 Senate: Clinton P. Anderson, J. William Fulbright, Leverett 

 Saltonstall ; members from the House of Representatives : Frank 

 T. Bow, Michael J. Kirwan, George H. Mahon; citizen mem- 

 bers: John Nicholas Brown, William A. M. Burden, Robert V. 

 Fleming, Crawford H. Greenewalt, Caryl P. Haskins, Jerome C. 

 Hunsaker. 



The customary informal dinner meeting, preceding the annual 

 meeting, was held on January 27, 1965, in the reception room of 

 the Museum of History and Technology. Dr. Richard S. 

 Cowan spoke on "The Smithsonian Institution's Bredin-Arch- 

 bold Biological Survey of Dominica"; Mendel L. Peterson on 

 "New Methods of Surveying Ancient Shipwrecks" ; and Dr. 

 I. E. Wallen on "Oceanography in the Smithsonian." 



The annual meeting was held on January 28, 1965, in the 

 conference room of the Museum of History and Technology. 

 The Secretary presented his published annual report on the 

 activities of the Institution. The chairman of the Executive 

 and Permanent Committees of the Board, Dr. Robert V. 

 Fleming, gave the financial report for the fiscal year ended 

 June 30, 1964. 



The spring meeting of the Board of Regents was held on 

 May 19 in the conference room of the Smithsonian building. 

 An informal dinner followed in the newly decorated Regents' 

 room. 



Finances 



A statement of finances, dealing particularly with Smithsonian 

 private funds, will be found in the report of the Executive Com- 

 mittee of the Board of Regents, page 401. 



Funds appropriated to the Institution for its regular operations 

 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1965, totaled $15,540,000 and 

 were obligated as follows : 



Astrophysical Observatory $1, 247, 610 



Bureau of American Ethnology 114, 648 




10 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Canal Zone Biological Area SI 79, 640 



International Exchange Service 113, 330 



National Air Museum 319, 601 



National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board 75, 302 



National Collection of Fine Arts 158, 971 



National Portrait Gallery 75, 004 



United States National Museum 5, 838, 639 



Office of the Secretary 395, 052 



Buildings Management Department 5, 322, 564 



Administrative Services 1, 677, 888 



Unobligated 21, 751 



Besides this direct appropriation, the Institution received 

 funds by transfer from other Government agencies as follows: 

 from the District of Columbia for the National Zoological Park, 

 $1,738,565; from the National Park Service, Department of the 

 Interior, for the River Basin Surveys, $237,000. 



Lectures 



Stella Mary Newton, formerly consultant on historic dress 

 and adviser to the Restoration Department of the National 

 Gallery, London, England, delivered an illustrated lecture, 

 "Social Implications in the Costumes in Hogarth's Paintings," 

 in the auditorium of the Museum of History and Technology on 

 the afternoon of October 27, 1964. 



Vice Admiral Friedrich O. Ruge, GN (Ret.), gave an illus- 

 trated lecture on "Rommel and the Invasion of Western Europe 

 in 1944" in the auditorium of the Museum of Natural History 

 on the evening of November 23, 1964. This lecture was spon- 

 sored jointly by the Smithsonian Institution and the Naval 

 Historical Foundation. 



Paul MacKendrick, professor of classics at the University of 

 Wisconsin, lectured on "Athenian Aristocracy: Archaeological 

 Evidence," in the auditorium of the Museum of History and 

 Technology on the evening of February 11, 1965. This illus- 

 trated lecture was sponsored jointly by the Smithsonian Institu- 

 tion and the Archaeological Institute of America. 



Scott Symons, assistant curator-in-charge of the Canadiana 

 collections, Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, Canada, gave an 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 11 



illustrated lecture, "French Ganadiana Versus the American 

 Dream," in the auditorium of the Museum of History and 

 Technology on the evening of February 16, 1965. 



The second Edwin A. Link Lecture, "The United States and 

 the Oceans," was delivered by Lt. Cmdr. Don Walsh, U.S.N., 

 in the auditorium of the Museum of Natural History on the eve- 

 ning of February 17, 1965. This series of lectures, made possible 

 by a grant from the Link Foundation, is administered by the 

 Smithsonian Institution in cooperation with the U.S. Office of 

 Education. 



Dr. A. G. W. Cameron, senior scientist, Goddard Institute 

 for Space Studies, Columbia University, gave the 30th Annual 

 James Arthur Lecture on the Sun on the evening of March 10, 

 1965, in the auditorium of the Freer Gallery of Art. His subject 

 was "The Early History of the Sun." 



Several lectures sponsored by the Freer Gallery of Art and the 

 National Gallery of Art are listed in the reports of these bureaus. 



Visitors 



Visitors to the six buildings comprising the Smithsonian com- 

 plex on the Mall this year again surpassed all preceding records 

 with a total of 13,153,713, which was 2,340,518 more than in 

 fiscal 1964. August 1964, with 2,517,672, was the month of 

 largest attendance, and July 1964 was second with 2,250,105. 

 The greatest number of visitors for a single day was 109,839 on 

 April 19, 1965. The tabulation on page 12 gives a summary of 

 attendance records for the six buildings. The National 

 Zoological Park had an estimated 4,536,256 visitors during the 

 year. This figure, added to the attendance in the Institution's 

 buildings on the Mall, and to the 1,253,102 recorded at the 

 National Gallery of Art, brings the total Smithsonian attendance 

 for fiscal 1965 to 18,943,071. 



New Offices 



Mindful of the widening horizons and varied opportunities 

 facing the Institution, the Smithsonian established three new 

 offices in the past year: 




12 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



o 



o 



▼"•vo^OrHTj-r-vocNoo^fNt^- 



©"r-^pTcCto'i-rcrcvfcrcCi-rin 



m *-i r- t^ i— a in » Tt i- o ^ 



>1§> 



.N«(OOOCOifl*ON>ONO 



c'so ooorinw + >oiflonooN 

 - ^o ©r~c\Cv|«noo'<*-c\i-ivomi > » 





t-i-ir-^vo>oiooo»-i«-ic<->T-i c\ 



[^ 00CMflNNrHHnNiOin>O O 



3,« 



<1 



ONOOO'^-OOOCOLO'^-vOdT-i 



ONNtinrtO^wmMO 

 co" o" w « o" t~-" ^o" r->" o" oT w" « 



3 



W 



^ r - SiS ! '\Oir>0'^-r^^-'t^-0<NO«OV3 



t-J "«*w moo«ne^or~"">c\oov©CNOo 



r^ .„ a "a i/f i-T' oC cT cf «-T in" t-T *-T ■«s- > oc? c? 



U JO .(a^ooor-~r^-^-cn»nsoo»0'-i 



W £ 'i5 N tf) M W TH <N 



I— I c\ "W 



M O 



ft^ C "^S».6jr|CN'- | ' , J"'- | 00CN\OCVI'<i-0OCOC<I 



S 3 ?^RT-iooooinT-<oooocOLO'«j-'nm 



O J- v2 i ><*«;'*''- l °°'''-°or-r^''--vomo\\o 



o <^rK^o ir > v ommcNoococovooco 



CO o "■) •* to »-< *-< 1-1 n N (<1 Cl Cl 



>- 



a -S-s o\cor^vomvoT-ir~-mr^cor- 



U* ii §?2 „ „ ,. .. * * 



w H* ^ 00000(NmoU->vOt^T-ivOfO 



""S Sen ooiT-or-iotvor^vsr-f^ 



•H^^'- | ' s »f s e s » v ot s O(on 



Ph S-SosO^HOCscOOO'-it^vOir) 



^■coT-ioor^'r-iincNOiocM 



„R^T-«T-l Tl TH 1-1 O 



to 



cd 



o S3 S) >, o 



-2 »- .Q is >» *T H 



i §i el & N- 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 13 



Smithsonian Office of Anthropology. — On February 1, 

 1965, the Bureau of American Ethnology and the Department 

 of Anthropology of the Museum of Natural History were com- 

 bined to form the new Smithsonian Office of Anthropology 

 under the Museum of Natural History. This consolidation 

 unites the efforts and resources of the Institution in modern 

 programs in ethnology, linquistics, archeology, and physical 

 anthropology. Dr. Richard B. Woodbury was appointed its 

 acting head. Activities of the new office as well as the bureau's 

 accomplishments in the past year are given on pages 39-53 of 

 this report. 



Division of Education and Training. — Recognition of the 

 Smithsonian's responsibilities and opportunities in research and 

 higher education led to the establishment in October 1964 of 

 the Division of Education and Training. Effective July 1, 1965, 

 Dr. Charles Blitzer was appointed its director. The objective 

 of this new division is to bring about the fullest use of the Insti- 

 tution's resources — both its collections and its distinguished staff 

 of scientists and scholars — and to make these resources available 

 to the scientific and scholarly community at large. This objec- 

 tive is being pursued through a variety of programs. 



Under one of these programs the Smithsonian entered into 

 agreements with a number of universities for cooperation in 

 postgraduate education. Typically, such agreements contem- 

 plate use of the Smithsonian collections by Ph. D. candidates 

 with the supervision of Smithsonian staff members ; often, closer 

 ties are developed between Smithsonian scholars and the 

 universities' graduate departments. During the year under 

 review, cooperative programs were established with the Uni- 

 versity of Kansas for graduate training in botany and pale- 

 ontology, with the University of Pennsylvania for graduate 

 training in the history and philosophy of science, and with the 

 George Washington University for graduate training in 

 American Studies, in museum techniques, and in sedimentology. 

 At the end of the year negotiations were in progress for similar 

 cooperative programs in anthropology, botany, field biology, 

 the fine arts, the history of art, and marine science. 



The results of these programs — already measurable in those 

 that have been operating for some time — will be the develop- 




14 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



ment of highly trained specialists in areas of the sciences, the 

 humanities, and the arts in which the Smithsonian traditionally 

 has been involved, as well as the enhancement of research 

 activities by the Institution's permanent staff as it is brought 

 into closer contact with colleagues in the academic world. 



The Division of Education and Training also conducted two 

 programs through which undergraduates and beginning grad- 

 uate students are brought to the Smithsonian during the summer 

 as junior research associates. Of the 53 students appointed 

 under this program, 16 were supported by a grant to the Smith- 

 sonian from the National Science Foundation's Undergraduate 

 Research Participation Program. Appointments were based 

 on academic achievement and potential for research, and con- 

 siderable care was taken to ensure that each student's experi- 

 ence would contribute significantly to his education. 



With a view toward extending the Smithsonian's services to 

 the local research community, the Division of Education and 

 Training conducted a survey of the educational activities of 

 Federal research centers, private research centers, and uni- 

 versities in and around the District of Columbia. Results of 

 this study were made available to those concerned with the 

 development of the area's potential for higher education. 



The division also arranged for the holding of a special summer 

 institute for 50 social science teachers from the public schools 

 of the District of Columbia. The purpose of the institute was 

 to develop with the teachers ways of using the museums on the 

 Mall as major educational resources for their classes. 



Throughout its history the Smithsonian has welcomed scien- 

 tists and scholars from colleges, universities, and other research 

 institutions in this country and abroad. Their use of the Smith- 

 sonian's collections, and their association with its professional 

 staff, clearly contribute to the purposes for which the Institution 

 exists. Their presence testifies to the importance of the Smith- 

 sonian's resources for research and, at the same time, serves lo 

 enliven the scholarly atmosphere of the Institution. 



To encourage the use of the Smithsonian's resources by out- 

 side investigators, and to ensure that their visits will prove as 

 fruitful as possible both from the point of view of advancing 

 human knowledge and from the point of view of the special 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 15 



concerns of the Smithsonian, the Division of Education and 

 Training is developing a number of programs for visiting re- 

 search associates. Funds, both public and private, are being 

 sought for these programs. 



Office of Special Projects. — The Office of Special Projects 

 was established this year with Robert N. Cunningham in charge. 



The primary concern of the office thus far has been the detailed 

 and thorough preparation for the formal commemoration of the 

 birth of the Institution's founder, James Smithson. The year 

 1965 marks the 200th anniversary of his birth, and Congress 

 designated September 17 and 18 as special days to honor Smith- 

 son's memory. In addition to honoring the Institution's 

 founder, the stated aims of the Bicentennial Celebration are : 



1. To pay tribute to the distinguished past of the Smith- 

 sonian and affirm to its members and Regents, to scholars, 

 scientists, and kindred institutions, and to the general public, 

 the Smithsonian's intent to fulfill a vital and useful role in 

 society; and 



2. To examine the nature of knowledge and creative dis- 

 covery as conceived by Smithson and as understood today. 



The Office of Special Projects has also been laying the ground- 

 work for the establishment of a Smithsonian Society of Associates, 

 an organization seen as a national association with several types 

 of membership, which would seek to diffuse knowledge of the 

 Institution as widely as possible in order to enlarge understand- 

 ing and support of its activities — thereby increasing the scope 

 and depth of the Smithsonian's scientific, cultural, and educa- 

 tional contributions to mankind. 





New flight cage at National Zoological Park was shown to distinguished 

 guests by Secretary and Mrs. S. Dillon Ripley at formal opening in February 

 1965. 





United States National Museum 



789-427—66 4 





United States National Museum 

 Frank A. Taylor, Director 



The annual reporting procedures of the U.S. National Museum have 

 been changed to take cognizance of the broadening scholarly horizons 

 of the Smithsonian Institution and of the enlarged scope of the Museum 

 of History and Technology resulting from the move to its new building. 



In order that its message reach a wider audience, the full report of 

 the U.S. National Museum, rather than the condensed version pre- 

 viously given, will be carried in Smithsonian Tear. Within the Museum 

 Report, henceforth, the work of the component Museums of Natural 

 History and of History and Technology will be treated separately. 

 Furthermore, the contents of each report are rearranged to emphasize 

 the fact that research and publication are the foundations from which 

 arise the other activities and services of the Museum. To this end, 

 also, a bibliography of staff publications is appended to the research 

 report of each office and department. A full list of the publications 

 issued by the Museum appears in the report on publications, on pages 

 392-395. 



Those activities heretofore found under the Bureau of American 

 Ethnology in the Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution are 

 reported by the Museum on pages 39-53, under the Smithsonian Office 

 of Anthropology, into which office the Bureau has been merged. 



The consolidated Annual Report formerly issued by the U.S. National 

 Museum is discontinued. Instead, separates of the reports of its com- 

 ponent Museums appearing in Smithsonian Tear will be available for 

 those accustomed to receive the consolidated Annual Report. To each 

 separate report will be appended a full list of the donors to that 

 Museum. 



Conservation 



To serve the various museums of the Smithsonian Institution, a con- 

 servation research laboratory has been established under the United 

 States National Museum. Directed by Charles H. Olin, its offices are 

 located in the Museum of History and Technology. 



The conservation research laboratory began the installation of 

 equipment for physical and chemical analysis. This includes in- 



19 




20 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



strumentation for x-ray spectrography and x-ray diffraction, equipment 

 for preparing, examining, and photographing cross-sections of metals, 

 an infrared spectrophotometer, and accessory equipment. 



In the area of x-ray spectrography, qualitative spectra were used to 

 identify the composition of metal alloys in objects from the Freer 

 Gallery and from the divisions of archeology, numismatics, mechanical 

 and civil engineering, medical sciences, and physical sciences of the 

 Museum of History and Technology. Approximately one-fourth of 

 the time devoted to x-ray analyses involved the establishment of 

 sampling methods and standards. In quantitative analysis, an in- 

 vestigation was begun into the method of sampling whereby drillings 

 of the sample are pressed into a pellet. X-ray diffraction was used 

 for the identification of corrosion products and pigments for the 

 National Collection of Fine Arts and for the divisions of cultural 

 history and archeology. 



Of 134 requests for analyses and conservation received, the laboratory 

 completed 52 analyses and furnished the services required in 54 of 

 the conservation requests. Advice was furnished on requirements 

 for collection preservation involving air conditioning and the control 

 of light and dust. Conservation treatment was performed on objects 

 of bronze, glass, hide, ceramics, and wood; and also on paintings, 

 prints, feathers, photographs, and archival materials, even though the 

 facilities of the laboratory are designed for analysis and conservation 

 research and not for treatment. 



The problem of providing an abstracting service for the fields of 

 conservation and archeological chemistry was studied for the laboratory 

 by Dr. Seymour Lewin, Conservation Center, New York University. 

 His report, which evaluated the problem and outlined a program, is now 

 being used to secure support for a proposed abstract journal. Professor 

 Cyril Smith, who visited the laboratory for one week, prepared reports 

 on the organization of the laboratory and on the metallographic 

 examination of objects from Ecuador. 




Museum of Natural History 





Museum of Natural History 

 T. Dale Stewart, Director 



The trend toward specialization in science has reached the point where 

 few museum curators can be considered broad naturalists in the sense of 

 some of their predecessors. Botanists more than ever concentrate on a 

 portion of one plant family and disclaim anything but a general knowl- 

 edge of other families. Vertebrate paleontologists work with larger 

 assemblages, such as groups of reptiles, fishes, or mammals, but often 

 in a single geographical area or geological epoch. Anthropologists 

 study man from the standpoint either of some part of his physique or 

 of his culture, and the latter only in its historic or its prehistoric aspect. 

 And much the same holds for other specialties. For this reason, and 

 also because more money is available for research than ever before, 

 research projects in which many people from a number of disciplines 

 participate have become customary. 



The Museum of Natural History finds itself involved in some large- 

 scale projects of this sort. Mention has been made in previous reports, 

 for example, of the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological Survey of 

 Dominica. Since January 1964 when it was initiated, 24 specialists 

 representing 10 disciplines have spent varying periods of time on this 

 Caribbean island. The Smithsonian African Mammal Project has had 

 altogether about 15 collectors in the field since 1961, giving attention 

 not only to the mammals but to their ectoparasites. Also, the 

 International Indian Ocean Expedition has included in its numerous 

 cruises 11 specialists from the Museum representing 6 different fields, 

 with a large back-up group in the Museum's Sorting Center hastening 

 the preparation of the resulting collections. 



But the project which surpasses all others in number of personnel and 

 size of the geographical area covered is the Pacific Ocean Biological 

 Survey Program, described in the following section by its principal 

 investigator. 



23 




24 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



An Ecological Survey of the Central Pacific 



The Smithsonian Institution is engaged in an ecological survey 

 of a central Pacific area comprising some four and a third million 

 square miles of open ocean, dotted here and there with clusters and 

 strings of islands and atolls. The major goals of this survey are to 

 learn what plants and animals occur on the islands in this vast region 

 and the seasonal variations in their numbers and reproductive activities, 

 and in addition to learn more about the factors which determine the 

 distribution and abundance of the birds of the open ocean in that 

 environment. 



The survey is designed to accumulate in a few years sufficient data 

 on the plants and animals, on the pelagic birds at sea, and on climatic 

 and oceanographic variables, to permit broad ecological conclusions 

 to be drawn. 



To initiate the survey, the Smithsonian sent several small field parties 

 to the Hawaiian Leeward and Phoenix Islands. As the survey grew 

 in scope, other institutions and government agencies joined the effort, 

 and today the Smithsonian alone has a combined field and laboratory 

 staff of about 40 intensively studying the plants and animals of 33 

 islands. 



The main area of interest (see map), which represents only a small 

 fraction of the total Pacific Ocean, was more or less arbitrarily delimited 

 to include a wide variety of island groups and oceanic conditions. It 

 spans the Equator, extending from latitudes 30° N. to 10° S., and it 

 includes islands and island groups from longitudes 150° to 180° W. 

 Most of the islands are products of coral construction on worn-off 

 volcanic upheavals— the tops of the submarine mountain ranges which 

 spring up from the ocean floor 15,000 to 18,000 feet below. The 

 Hawaiian Islands stretch for 1,578 miles across the northern end of the 

 study area. Johnston Atoll, an isolated surface indication of the vast 

 mid-Pacific mountain range, lies 450 miles south of the Hawaiian ridge. 

 Farther south and to the east, the Line Islands stretch in a long chain 

 across the Equator. In the southwestern corner of the study area 

 Howland and Baker lie just north of the Equator, the Phoenix Islands 

 are clustered 3° to 5° south of it, and the Tokelaus lie 5° farther south. 



Except for the main Hawaiian Islands and certain of the Line and 

 Phoenix Islands, this whole area is characterized by low rainfall. The 

 majority of the low-lying coral islands have desert climates. Their 

 sparse vegetation consists of a few grasses, herbs, and dwarf shrubs. 



A few species of terrestrial mammals and reptiles, some of them 

 introduced by man, occur on several of the islands, but across this vast 

 central-Pacific area, oceanic birds are the dominant terrestrial verte- 




r 



Pacific Ocean Biological Survey party landing on Lisianski Island, Hawaii. 

 Below: Campsite on Phoenix Island. 




' • .". 



Banding a blue-faced booby at Gardiner pinnacles, Hawaiian Islands. Below: 

 Sooty-tern colony on Laysan Island. Background vegetation is bunch grass 

 (Eragrostis variabilis) and escaped cultivated tobacco. (See pp. 26-27.) 






MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY — INTRODUCTION 25 



«ft- 



H 



4 H' 



4/ 



/V 



^v: 



* JOHNSTON-SAND 



«k_ 



o 



A/ 



r -v. 



J 1 



. HOWLAND 



O 



^\X I 





5L A/V D 



SL AA/ 



Area of Pacific Ocean Biological Survey spans the Equator, extending from 

 latitudes 30° N. to 10° S. and from longitudes 150° to 180° W. (See p. 24.) 



789^27—^66 6 




26 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



brates. Apart from the endemic and introduced birds on the 

 main Hawaiians and certain of the Hawaiian Leeward and Line 

 Islands, about 90 species occur as migrants, accidentals, or nesting 

 birds. On islands of the area, 28 species of oceanic birds are known to 

 nest, and an additional 21 species occur as regular migrants or 

 accidentals. 



The ecology of oceanic birds is a curious hybrid between the ter- 

 restrial ecology of islands and the ecology of the sea (more often called 

 oceanography), in that the surrounding ocean provides food for the 

 island avifauna and affects the climate of the island as well. The 

 ecology of the oceanic birds under study, moreover, is affected not only 

 by conditions on and around the islands, but by conditions in regions 

 remote from the central Pacific. 



Present conditions on these islands reflect the introduction of many 

 species of plants and animals over the years by man, who has also made 

 major changes in the distribution and abundance of soils and other 

 surface materials by his guano mining during the latter part of the 

 19th century. Hence, to understand, the disturbed conditions on many 

 of the islands, it has been necessary to delve deeply into the history of 

 man's activities in the central Pacific. 



Fortunately, the extensive file of published and unpublished reports, 

 diaries, and other records pertaining to the area, organized by Edwin 

 H. Bryan, Jr., manager of the Pacific Scientific Information Center at 

 the Bernice P. Bishop Museum, and the extensive files of Dr. F. Ray- 

 mond Fosberg of the U.S. Geological Survey have been placed at 

 the service of the Smithsonian. From these and other sources can be 

 learned the extent to which man has disturbed the ecology of some of 

 these Pacific islands. For example, over a period of about two decades 

 during the latter part of the 19th century, approximately 125,000 tons 

 of guano were removed from Howland, a remote desert island only 

 eight-tenths of a square mile in area. In the 1930's this island was 

 colonized, and three airplane runways, each 150 feet wide, were built, 

 preempting 7 percent of its total area. And in the early years of 

 World War II it was shelled or bombed at various times. 



On islands of the nearby Phoenix group from which the human popu- 

 lations have been moved out, a legacy remains of introduced plants 

 and mammals, of which the domestic cat is surely the most destructive 

 influence. Phoenix and McKean Islands are free of cats and support 

 16 species of nesting birds including petrels, shearwaters, boobies, 

 frigatebirds, tropicbirds, and terns. Howland and Baker Islands both 

 had cat populations. At that time Howland supported only 5 nesting 

 species of birds, numbering fewer than 3,000 individuals, and Baker 




MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY INTRODUCTION 27 



but one nesting species, the noddy tern, with a population of fewer 

 than 100. 



One year later all cats on Howland and Baker were finally extermi- 

 nated. Almost immediately the number of species present and nesting 

 increased. Coincidentally, on Baker Island the house mouse became 

 superabundant, with its population estimated to number in the hun- 

 dreds of thousands, where in the previous year it had been extremely 

 rare. Thus, even though man's actions have drastically modified many 

 of the islands, changing the vegetation and in some cases exterminating 

 some of the animals, the sea-bird populations are able to recover swiftly 

 when predators are eliminated through effective conservation. 



Although the ecology of plants and animals of all kinds is the concern 

 of the Smithsonian survey, most of the field effort has been devoted to 

 the birds and arthropods, which are the most abundant terrestrial 

 organisms in the central Pacific. In the two and one-half years that the 

 survey has been under way, enormous quantities of data have been 

 collected and are being organized, but as yet any attempt at synthesis 

 would be premature. New data and new ideas are appearing at such 

 a rapid rate that it will be some time before a first level of organization 

 and synthesis is completed and ecological conclusions can be drawn. 



An example of the survey's data-collecting efforts is the study of 

 bird distribution in the central Pacific by means of banding. This 

 banding program is designed to provide answers to such questions as: 

 What contribution do the bird populations of each island make to the 

 avifauna of the open sea? What is the pattern of dispersal of birds from 

 any given island — where do they go after the nesting season? It is also 

 designed to provide new facts concerning the biology and behavior of 

 the population of birds on any given island, and on the origins of the 

 migratory birds which pass through or winter in the area. To provide 

 this information enormous numbers of birds must be banded. Up to 

 April 1965, Smithsonian field parties had attached U.S. Fish and 

 Wildlife Service bands to the legs of over 425,000 birds of 44 species. 

 Although most of these birds were banded on islands in the area of 

 interest, programs were also undertaken in the Marshalls and Gilberts, 

 on Wake Island, and on St. George Island in the Pribilofs. 



For most of the resident species in the area of interest, it is the hope 

 to band over 50 percent of entire populations. For species such as the 

 sooty tern, the populations of which number in the millions, this is 

 clearly impossible, but for species with populations numbering in the 

 tens of thousands, the Smithsonian has been able to band over half the 

 entire breeding population. The blue -faced booby illustrates this 

 point: over 25,000 individuals have been banded in the study area, and 




28 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



of this number more than 500 have been recaptured at sea or at other 

 islands. The data from interisland returns of banded birds now make 

 it possible to state in quantitative terms the differences between age 

 groups and nesting and nonnesting birds in their amount of wandering 

 at different times of the year. As additional data of these kinds ac- 

 cumulate, it will be possible to determine the amount of interisland 

 mixing, the composition of roosting flocks, age at first nesting, longev- 

 ity, mortality curves, and so on. 



The effectiveness of the Smithsonian banding program in the central 

 Pacific has been largely due to the enthusiastic cooperation of the U.S. 

 Fish and Wildlife Service Bird Banding Laboratory. Without this 

 organization and its system of maintaining and processing data, the 

 program could never have gotten underway. 



In order to increase the rate of recovery of banded birds throughout 

 the Pacific world, the Smithsonian has sent out thousands of copies of 

 a notice soliciting reports of banded or color-marked birds. Printed 

 in five languages, these have been distributed to 19 countries and 21 

 major island groups, where the notice has been further translated 

 into Korean, Malay, Samoan, Gilbertese, Ponapean, and other 

 languages, and has been reprinted in newspapers, magazines, and vari- 

 ous commercial and official or semiofficial government reports. The 

 notice has formed the basis for lectures to school children, clubs, and 

 professional groups, and it has been distributed to vessels in various 

 commercial fishing fleets and shipping lines, and to the U.S. Navy, 

 Merchant Marine, and Coast Guard. The Smithsonian also issues a 

 newsletter which is sent to all cooperators in the Pacific-wide bird 

 banding program. This publicity effort, in addition to increasing the 

 recovery of banded birds, heightens public interest in problems of 

 conservation in the Pacific area. 



Although most of the field work in the central Pacific is being under- 

 taken by a Smithsonian field staff under director Charles A. Ely, 

 whose offices are in Honolulu, the success of the program depends 

 most heavily on the generous cooperation of numerous collaborating 

 institutions and individuals. 



An agreement between the Institution and the U.S. Department of 

 the Interior has resulted in a free exchange of information and services, 

 particularly with respect to the Hawaiian Leeward Islands, where 

 mutual interest and exchange of information further enhances the 

 status of these islands as wildlife refuges or sanctuaries. The Smith- 

 sonian has received enthusiastic cooperation from the State of Hawaii 

 Division of Fish and Game, which represents the interest of the State in 

 ecology, management, and conservation. 




MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY INTRODUCTION 



29 



BLACK- FOOTED ALBATROSS 

 LESSER FRIGATEBIRDS 

 RUDDY TURNSTONES 



Recoveries of birds banded under Pacific Ocean Biological Survey Program 

 r-T'are shown by hatched areas. (See p. 28.) 



The effectiveness of Smithsonian studies of the distribution of 

 pelagic birds at sea is almost entirely dependent upon the Department 

 of the Interior, Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, in Honolulu. This 

 agency has generously provided not only ship support for bird censuses, 

 but also a body of oceanographic data which, when combined with the 

 ornithological data, will make a unique contribution to our understand- 

 ing of the oceanographic factors affecting their distribution. 



Modern transportation and communication facilities are essential 

 for the coordination of a large-scale biological survey over such a 

 vast region. The Smithsonian maintains permanent field parties on 

 two islands through the courtesy of the U.S. Coast Guard, which also, 

 from time to time, very kindly grants opportunities for Smithsonian 

 personnel to visit various islands during the course of regular Coast 

 Guard trips. In addition, the U.S. Navy has generously permitted 

 Smithsonian personnel to carry out at-sea observations on its vessels. 

 Never before has it been feasible to visit most of the islands in this 

 area three or four times a year, or to carry out monthly at-sea surveys 

 over a period of years to collect data on pelagic bird distribution and 

 on various physical oceanographic factors. 




30 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Studies of the distribution and ecology of terrestrial plants on islands 

 of the central Pacific, in which Dr. Charles Lamoureaux and Mr. 

 Robert Long, of the University of Hawaii, are collaborating with the 

 Smithsonian Institution, are important not only in developing an 

 inventory of plants on each of the islands and a history of plant intro- 

 ductions, but also to an understanding of the factors affecting the 

 distribution and abundance of terrestrial animals. 



Perhaps the most important practical accomplishment of the Smith- 

 sonian survey will be the delineation of the environment over a relatively 

 short period of time. This will provide a baseline of comparison 

 for biologists concerned, 10 or 20 years from now, with measuring the 

 effects of man-made modifications of the environment on natural 

 populations of organisms. The need for such a baseline is most 

 urgent today, when man, in his struggle to advance himself, is changing 

 the face of the earth at an appallingly rapid rate, and is subjecting 

 the total environment — water, atmosphere, and living tissues — to 

 physical and chemical influences which need to be measure^ g)w and 

 in the future. For unless these fundamental changes in his environ- 

 ment are properly assessed, man himself, through ignorance, may fall 

 victim to his own progress. 



Philip S. Humphrey 

 Chairman, Department of Vertebrate ^oology 




Research and Publications 



SYSTEMATICS 



The Office of Systematics was established early in 1965 to provide a 

 focal point for systematic interests both within the Museum of Natural 

 History and outside it. Although nearly all the professional staff 

 engage in systematic research, interdisciplinary needs increasingly 

 occur which can be met best by a non-discipline-oriented office. 

 Typical of these needs are research problems requiring joint attack 

 by several disciplines. 



In long-range terms, the most important project which transects 

 all disciplinary lines involves data processing by computer. As the 

 number of specimens in natural history collections increases, a stage is 

 reached at which the specimen-attached data become difficult or 

 impossible to organize and recover by "manual" methods. A central 

 file of such data from our own millions of specimens, and ultimately 

 including those of other museums, will provide the means by which 

 many permutations of these data can be performed almost instantly. 

 Moreover, bibliographic, karyologic, genetic, ecologic, and biochemi- 

 cal data can be inserted in such a data bank and retrieved in various 

 new combinations with other data. Such a facility will provide the 

 researcher with a means by which an almost limitless number of data 

 configurations can be programed to meet his needs. 



Such vast files of information require any available device which 

 facilitates their organization into retrievable form; the binomial borne 

 by each species of plant or animal is the means by which the most 

 diverse sort of information can be organized, stored, and retrieved. 

 But 30 million names are difficult and prohibitively expensive to use 

 directly in an information system. Under way is the development of 

 a code to express names in machine-readable form, free of hierarchical 

 implications and completely open-ended. Support from several sources 

 is being sought to complete the code and begin the accumulation of data. 



The International Biological Program will begin field operations 

 in January 1967, and those studying the biota of Africa will have in 

 hand a field guide to the mammals. This is the objective of a project 

 receiving Institutional support through the Office of Systematics. One 

 of the foremost mammalogists in southern Africa is writing various 

 parts of the manual, and he is securing the contributions of mammal 

 specialists over the world. 



The National Institutes of Health have provided contractual support 

 for a project to search among our collections for tumors of invertebrates 



31 




32 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



and cold-blooded vertebrates. There is reasonable hope that the 

 phylogeny of some of the animal groups, as well as that of tumor 

 diseases, may be elucidated by this project. 



An ad hoc committee consisting of representatives from archeology, 

 paleobotany, and modern plant systematics has participated in present- 

 ing the need for a pollen laboratory and staff. Pollen grains are highly 

 resistant to destruction and are so distinctive as to permit the specialist 

 to reconstruct reasonably accurately the former vegetation of an area 

 and the environmental conditions under which the plants grew. 

 Likewise, the pollens of primitive man's crop plants persist in the refuse 

 of his habitations and reveal much about the kinds of things he grew 

 and under what conditions. The student of recent plants uses paly- 

 nological data to reconstruct the evolutionary history of plant groups 

 and to clarify phylogenetic relationships. Funds have been set aside 

 for the equipping of the laboratory, and it is hoped that a research 

 palynologist can be employed by the end of the next fiscal year. 



A new publication, "Smithsonia," planned for next year, is dis- 

 tinctive in that it is a series of which each unit is devoted to the descrip- 

 tion of a new species or redescription of an old one. Such a format 

 will permit progressive revision of genera and other taxa by the pub- 

 lication of groups of descriptions. 



Initial planning has begun toward convening at the Smithsonian in 

 1966 an international symposium on systematics, jointly sponsored 

 by the National Science Foundation, the National Academy of Sciences, 

 and the Smithsonian Institution. Outstanding systematists from 

 abroad will participate with prominent American ones in a one-day 

 session on principles of systematics and a second day on methodologies. 

 It is hoped that future conferences can be held on important questions 

 related to the training of both technical researchers and scientific aides 

 for systematics. Such meetings satisfy an important responsibility of 

 the Office — to represent systematics at all levels, to urge the incorpora- 

 tion of taxonomic data in otherwise non-systematic studies, and to 

 broaden the base of current systematics to include information from as 

 many ancillary sources as possible. 



ECOLOGY 



Man has learned, to a very large extent, how to escape, through 

 control of his environment, the pangs of hunger, the rigors of un- 

 favorable weather, and the anxieties of individual preservation, as op- 

 posed to group protection. In the process, however, man has so 

 greatly modified his surroundings that the human species, as its popula- 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS ECOLOGY 33 



tions expand apace, stands in very real danger of losing control over 

 its own destiny. To focus research effort, while there is yet time, on 

 important problems of environmental biology, plans were completed 

 for establishing, on July 1, 1965, an Office of Ecology. Selected as 

 its head, and assistant director for ecology, is Helmut Buechner, who 

 will continue his own researches in the behavior of certain ungulate 

 mammals. 



Since the systematic research produced by the professional staff has 

 generally included ecological data, the program represents not a 

 beginning of Institutional interest but a means to focus staff attention 

 on the subject and to facilitate cooperation between the Smithsonian 

 and other Federal agencies and educational organizations. 



In January an informal conference of outstanding biologists discussed 

 research trends and opportunities in environmental biology, including 

 ecology, genetics, behavior, and the study of wild populations under 

 natural conditions. Participants were requested specifically to con- 

 sider (1) what contributions might be made by environmental studies 

 in the New World Tropics, (2) the desirability of undertaking studies of 

 soil ecology, and (3) the projected field stations on Chesapeake Bay. 



Several planning sessions were devoted to organizing the Center for 

 Field Biology, on land at the head of Chesapeake Bay, in summer of 

 1965. As its first director, Kyle Barbehenn will be in charge of the 

 Center and its program development. Sharing the Center with 

 Smithsonian research personnel will be biologists from the Johns 

 Hopkins University, the University of Maryland, and, to a limited 

 extent, from the National Institutes of Health, who will study captive 

 animals, as well as native and migrating ones, and their possible inter- 

 action with the environment. 



Consideration has been given to undertaking a research program 

 on soil biology in which will be investigated the nature of the inter- 

 actions of soil organisms on each other and with their environment. 

 Although applied studies of soil organisms are under way in various 

 research laboratories, little or no attention has been devoted to the 

 ecological aspects of this problem. 



Since the International Biological Program is strongly oriented toward 

 environmental biology, the Office of Ecology will also be a focal point 

 for staff participation in this program. 



OCEANOGRAPHY 



Although the Smithsonian Institution has been engaged in studies of 

 marine organisms since Spencer F. Baird joined its staff more than 




34 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



100 years ago, the active involvement of the Institution in a National 

 Oceanography Program has made it necessary for the Institution to 

 reexamine its interests and capabilities for studying the world ocean. 



This reexamination has rested comfortably within the context of the 

 traditional operations of the Museum of Natural History; that is to say, 

 the Smithsonian's marine operations are principally concerned with 

 collecting marine natural-history objects in order to determine the 

 kinds, distributions, and populations of organisms and sediments in 

 the world ocean. These studies are oriented toward systematics; the 

 available data are exploited, however, for additional information 

 concerning the ecology, biogeography, and evolution of the specimens 

 collected. Because proper study of these specimens is not feasible 

 without an active program to gather material from areas not repre- 

 sented in the national collections, Smithsonian scientists continue to 

 seek collections from chartered vessels and from ships of many public 

 and private agencies. 



In addition to these research responsibilities, the Smithsonian has 

 always provided limited service to other governmental and non- 

 governmental scientists by making identifications of natural-history 

 objects. As a part of its expansion in the National Oceanography 

 Program, the Institution has now developed an increased capability 

 for the accomplishment of such service by establishing the Smithsonian 

 Oceanographic Sorting Center for the separation of bulk collections 

 into groups which may be studied effectively by individual scientists. 



The magnitude of effort required for this involvement in the National 

 Oceanography Program is evidenced by the nearly 80 U.S. oceano- 

 graphic vessels of assorted sizes that are gathering marine specimens, 

 many of which may end up at the Smithsonian Institution: 10 private 

 U.S. oceanographic institutions use 22 ships for oceanographic col- 

 lection of data and specimens; 22 Coast Guard vessels collect data and 

 specimens on ocean stations; and many large and small vessels of the 

 Navy, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Bureau of Commercial 

 Fisheries, and other government agencies obtain data and collections 

 from the ocean. Impetus recently has been given to a so-called 

 "ships of opportunity" effort which could use for biological collections 

 many of the estimated 6,000 civilian and military ships which may be 

 at sea on any one day in the North Atlantic alone. The backlog of 

 biological research information waiting to be uncovered is scarcely 

 realized, even within the Museum. 



The oceanography plans of the Institution have been developed in 

 continuous consultation with scientists of the United States in all 

 fields of biological oceanography. Hence, a large portion of this 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS OCEANOGRAPHY 35 



program involves cooperation with many other agencies. Since 

 1962 the Institution has maintained membership in the Interagency 

 Committee on Oceanography (ICO), and the assistant director for 

 oceanography of the Museum of Natural History is chairman of its 

 research panel. In addition to support from Congress, joint research 

 projects, with funds from both organizations, have been undertaken by 

 the Smithsonian and each of the Atomic Energy Commission, the Office 

 of Naval Research, the Department of State, the Bureau of Commercial 

 Fisheries, the National Science Foundation, the Naval Oceanographic 

 Office, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the 

 Interagency Committee on Oceanography, and one state agency — the 

 Maryland Fisheries Commission. Also, joint research projects have 

 been undertaken by staff members of the Institution with support from 

 the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, the Lamont Geological 

 Observatory, the Marine Biological Laboratory of Woods Hole, the 

 University of Maryland, Duke University, the University of Kansas, 

 Johns Hopkins University, the University of Michigan, the University 

 of Minnesota, the University of Miami, the University of Southern 

 California, Yale University, Florida State University, the University 

 of Washington, and others. 



Regional industrial and professional groups, foundations, and in- 

 dividuals also have provided support and specimens to the Institution's 

 oceanography program. These include International Business Ma- 

 chines, Inc., the American Institute of Biological Sciences, the Link 

 Foundation, the National Geographic Society, the American Chemical 

 Society, the Guggenheim Foundation, the Hong Kong Fisheries 

 Research Station, the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, 

 the Guinean Trawling Survey, the Indian Ocean Biological Center, 

 the National Oceanographic Data Center, General Ed Schwengel, 

 Jeanne Schwengel, and Edwin A. Link. 



Specimens have been identified for the Naval Oceanographic Office, 

 the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Coastal Engineering Research 

 Center, the Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, the Bureau of 

 Commercial Fisheries, the National Science Foundation's Antarctic 

 Research Program, and a large number of other Federal and private 

 organizations. 



Field support has been provided to members of the oceanography 

 staff by ships of the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, the Woods Hole 

 Oceanographic Institution, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the 

 National Science Foundation, Stanford University, the University of 

 Southern California, the Marine Biological Laboratory of Woods 

 Hole, Mass., the University of Miami, and the National Aeronautics 




36 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



and Space Administration. Vessels also have been chartered specifi- 

 cally for use by the Institution. 



Projects that have been supported by other agencies have been in the 

 areas of marine systematics and ecology, the processing of specimens, 

 the keeping of records of natural-history specimens, and the publication 

 of appropriate documents, as well as the establishment of an oceano- 

 graphic exhibit in the Museum of Natural History. 



In doing research on the biological and geological natural history 

 of the oceans, members of the staff of the Smithsonian Institution have 

 functioned to study existing collections of the Museum of Natural 

 History and other museums; to take additional collections in unique 

 areas; to describe organisms in relation to their environment; to report 

 unusual natural history features, such as the presence of cancer and 

 other abnormalities, in order that biological and physiological studies 

 might be pursued elsewhere; to formulate theories with regard to the 

 evolution of organisms; to provide explanations of the intra- and inter- 

 relationships of organisms; to develop field guides for the easy identifica- 

 tion of marine specimens; to develop and test basic collecting gear for 

 use in studying marine organisms; to provide an urgently needed 

 identification service; to assemble, maintain, and provide access to the 

 national collections; to provide a collecting staff for use in unique 

 areas; to develop curating and preservation techniques, and other 

 handling advice and experience; and to provide for proper storage of 

 collections in appropriate facilities. 



A natural outgrowth of the National Oceanography Program has 

 been an ever-broadening involvement of the Institution in collections 

 from the routine operations as a part of the world ocean survey, from 

 research cruises and expeditions of other agencies, and from special 

 international programs such as the International Indian Ocean Expe- 

 dition and the International Cooperative Investigations of the Tropical 

 Atlantic. The Institution has found it desirable to be involved as 

 closely as possible in the planning of various expeditions and has en- 

 deavored to produce labels and specimen-handling information on a 

 continuing basis, so that collections can be maintained in better con- 

 dition for ultimate study and so that adequate environmental infor- 

 mation is available to provide broad interpretation of the biological 

 data resulting from the studies. 



Perhaps the most obvious of the changes in the first three years of the 

 Smithsonian's research effort in oceanography has been a large increase 

 in staff involvement in biological and geological oceanography activi- 

 ties. Not only has the number of scientists involved in the oceanog- 

 raphy program tripled in these three years, but the number of organi- 




Photomicrography of phytoplankton samples at the Smithsonian Oceano- 

 graphic Sorting Center. Below: Zooplankton laboratory houses many 

 activities, including recording and verifying data, splitting and relabeling 

 samples, sorting aliquots to 52 taxonomic categories, and packaging and 

 shipping invoiced specimens to specialists. (See pp. 37-39.) 




Top, left: Bird stomach, received at the Sorting Center from Pacific Ocean 

 Biological Survey, is opened for examination of contents; right: small 

 bottom invertebrates are separated and retrieved by sieving. Below: 

 Tagged grouper being placed in monel-lined tank containing 75% ethyl 

 alcohol. (See pp. 37-39.) 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — OCEANOGRAPHY 37 



zational units included in the program also has tripled. Whereas 

 before, the Institution had extremely restricted capability to treat the 

 nearly 100 major groups of marine organisms, selective recruiting has 

 resulted in the addition of capabilities to examine and carry out research 

 on groups which could not be included in earlier oceanographic efforts. 



The expansion of staff within the Museum of Natural History has 

 been almost entirely in the systematics area. Additional groups of 

 marine organisms may now be studied, and in this fiscal year, capabili- 

 ties have been added to carry out research in such marine groups as 

 ostracodes, amphipods, nematodes, macroalgae, coralline algae, and 

 plankton. New personnel include a senior electron microscopist, a 

 sedimentologist, and a petrologist interested in marine rocks. 



The principal new activity within the oceanography program is the 

 Smithsonian Oceanographic Sorting Center, conceived by A. G. Smith, 

 former Assistant Secretary for Science, and organized in January 1963 

 to receive bulk samples from governmental and private sources; to 

 separate them into appropriate taxa for identification by specialists; to 

 obtain and coordinate the station data to provide maximum environ- 

 mental information with the specimens; to experiment with preserva- 

 tion, labeling, accessioning, shipping, and storage of specimens; to 

 train technicians for all aspects of specimen handling; and to provide 

 information and forms helpful to oceanographic investigations by 

 insuring that consideration be given to the maximum collection of 

 environmental data. 



More than five million specimens have been sorted by the Center, and 

 more than three million of these have been shipped to specialists for 

 study. In spite of this productivity, the Center has a tremendous back- 

 log of specimens which have been given it for processing, and a sub- 

 stantial expansion in its staff is needed to work on the specimens. 



The Sorting Center uses a series of seven advisory groups, each con- 

 sisting of five members with differing research specialties. The advice 

 of these committees is sought with regard to the assignment for study 

 of specimens processed by the Center and for recommendations of 

 permanent depositories of identified specimens. In addition to these 

 continuing groups, the Center has sought specific advice from John 

 Wickstead of the British Plymouth Laboratory; from Ruth Patrick of 

 the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences; from Allan Be of the 

 Lamont Geological Observatory; from E. C. Jones of the Bureau of 

 Commercial Fisheries Laboratory in Hawaii; from Saul Saila of the 

 University of Rhode Island; and from Isabel Farfantes Canet. In 

 addition, assistance and advice is given by the several hundred sci- 

 entists visiting the Center. Such guidance is continually sought 

 through correspondence with the above and other persons. 



7S9^27— 66 7 




38 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Of special note is project support for strong involvement of the Sort- 

 ing Center in the U.S. Antarctic Research Program of the National 

 Science Foundation (NSF). With NSF support, the Center lists 

 specimens taken from all past U.S. efforts in the Antarctic, and it sorts 

 and maintains records of specimens now being taken from the Ant- 

 arctic. In addition, the photographs of the ocean bottom taken from 

 the NSF research vessel Eltanin are duplicated and distributed to 

 scientists. 



Also noteworthy are collections made available for study by the Na- 

 tional Science Foundation through the International Indian Ocean 

 Expedition, by the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, and by the Inter- 

 governmental Oceanographic Commission's International Cooperative 

 Investigations of the Tropical Atlantic. Other collections have come 

 to the Sorting Center from the Pacific Halibut Commission, the Inter- 

 American Tropical Tuna Commission, the Guinean Trawling Survey, 

 the Geological Survey, the Coast Guard, the Naval Oceanographic 

 Office, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Coastal Engineering Re- 

 search Center, the Laboratory of Radiation Biology of the University 

 of Washington, the University of Michigan, the Atomic Energy 

 Commission, and the Government of Chile. 



Through the Sorting Center, technician Jack Rudloe was employed 

 to make special collections as a professional collector during the Inter- 

 national Indian Ocean Expedition; T. Peter Lowe worked as a tech- 

 nician in lieu of a scientist on the Anton Bruun; and Mrs. LaNelle Peter- 

 son and Mrs. Cynthia Stoertz participated as professional collectors in 

 a cruise of the Eltanin in the Antarctic in early 1965. 



Special labels and other collecting materials and forms were devel- 

 oped for, and provided to, the International Indian Ocean Expedition, 

 the International Cooperative Investigations of the Tropical Atlantic, 

 and the U.S. Antarctic Research Program. Duplication and distribu- 

 tion of these labels, as well as the provision of a central receiving and 

 processing facility, have resulted in increasing the effective results of 

 natural history expeditions by providing for better maintenance of more 

 collections for study. 



The Sorting Center has served as a unifying influence in the system- 

 atics of marine organisms by providing specimens and information con- 

 ing the stages of their processing, together with information on the 

 commitments of specialists scattered throughout the world. Visiting 

 scientists may find working space in the Center. As a result of the 

 activities of the Center, an increasing number of the individual speci- 

 mens from multiple bulk collections are being processed for their re- 

 search value, and the results may be fitted together more effectively. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS OCEANOGRAPHY 39 



It is anticipated that this flourishing activity will go on from its healthy 

 beginning to do much to meet the challenge of man's expansion into 

 the ocean. 



As the most recent new effort of the Smithsonian, an oceanographic 

 vessel has been acquired from Navy surplus and modified slightly for 

 use in an investigation of coralline algae of the North Atlantic Ocean. 

 This vessel, the Phykos, is a converted small freighter, 133'9" length, 

 30' beam, 650-ton displacement, which will be used principally as a 

 platform for SCUBA diving and for the operation of a small undersea 

 vehicle. It is anticipated that a crew of six or seven will be able to 

 operate the vessel for a scientist to collect these algae from shallow 

 depths around the margin of the North Atlantic. The Phykos began 

 operation during this year and will operate throughout the next. 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



The Smithsonian Office of Anthropology was created on February 

 1, 1965, to renew and expand the Smithsonian's role in anthro- 

 pology. Uniting the separate activities of the Bureau of American 

 Ethnology and of the Department of Anthropology of the Museum 

 of Natural History, it includes all the personnel of both former units, 

 and its head is also an assistant director of the Museum of Natural 

 History. The Office consists of a division of cultural anthropology and 

 a division of physical anthropology, and it administers the Smith- 

 sonian River Basin Surveys. It also includes the archives and library 

 of the Bureau of American Ethnology, a conservation laboratory, and 

 a section for illustrations. It maintains the only set, in the vicinity of 

 Washington, of the Human Relations Area Files, a comprehensive, 

 systematic inventory of data on a worldwide sample of cultural groups. 

 Renovation of its office space, work areas, and storage sections in the 

 Museum of Natural History provides excellent space for SOA's activ- 

 ities, and offices for the newly merged professional and subprofessional 

 staffs. Thus, for the first time since the 19th century, all the anthro- 

 pological personnel of the Institution is under one roof, and the foun- 

 dation has been laid for carrying on past activities efficiently and 

 initiating new anthropological programs of several types. 



Publication of the Bulletins of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 

 which began in 1887, will cease with Bulletin 200, and henceforth 

 anthropological papers and monographs will appear in the new series 

 "Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology," which has a new format 

 and increased page size that present more effectively such material as 

 illustrations, tables, and maps. Unlike the Bulletins, the new series 




40 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



will include material dealing with the Old World as well as the New. 



Research in the Old World was conducted in a few widely scattered 

 areas. Olga Linares de Sapir, who was appointed a collaborator in 

 January 1965, began archeological research in Senegal with a post- 

 doctoral fellowship from the National Science Foundation. This 

 portion of Africa is one of the least-known archeologically of any part 

 of the world, and the establishment of a firm sequence of prehistoric 

 events will be of great importance. 



In June, J. Lawrence Angel left for an extended investigation of 

 human skeletons excavated from Neolithic and other sites in Greece 

 and Turkey. His work, supported by the American Philosophical 

 Society and the Wenner-Gren Foundation, continues research in physi- 

 cal anthropology in Greece, carried on for many years, into the 

 social biology of culture change. 



Field work in the Far East was carried out by William C. Sturtevant, 

 who from October 1963 to October 1964 was in Burma investigating 

 the forms, functions, and symbolism of modern Burmese dress. Prior 

 to returning he visited London to examine archival material on 

 Burmese dress. 



From August 29 to October 30, Richard B. Woodbury examined in 

 Spain, Libya, Egypt, Pakistan, and Israel a great variety of ancient 

 and modern water-control systems, especially cisterns, irrigation ditches, 

 and terraces, for comparison with the New World techniques studied 

 in the Western United States and in Mexico. The trip, supported by 

 the National Science Foundation, included visits to abandoned Roman 

 irrigation works in Libya, modern farms in the Fayum using traditional 

 water systems, Mohenjo-Daro, a center of intensive irrigation in the 

 Indus Valley five millennia ago, and the restored Nabatean terraced 

 farms of the Negev in Israel. 



Eugene I. Knez continued research on several aspects of Korean and 

 Japanese culture, working particularly on a bibliography of Korean 

 anthropology with emphasis on Asian literature, and on a study of 

 Japanese ceramic materials in this Institution. He is seeking to relate 

 the ceramics chronologically to traditional kiln sites in Japan. Knez 

 also visited several museums to study material aspects of Korean culture 

 in connection both with future exhibits and a monograph on Korean 

 village life that he is preparing. 



William H. Crocker continued field work with the Canela of Brazil, 

 with whom he worked in 1963. This small tribe, living in relative 

 isolation and supporting themselves by a simple pattern of hunting, 

 gathering, and rudimentary farming, is now undergoing rapid changes 

 due to the pressure from Brazilian settlers in adjacent areas. Prior to 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — ANTHROPOLOGY 41 



his arrival in the field in July 1964, the Canela had been moved from 

 their savannah habitat to a forested reservation, providing radically 

 different surroundings, different resources, and a serious challenge to 

 the continuation of their way of life. Six months before this, a Canela 

 woman had announced that she was receiving messages transmitted by 

 the motions of her unborn child. These messages were thought to be 

 instructions from the Canela culture hero who announced in this way 

 that when the child was born he would transform the Canela world 

 into a city with all the comforts and machines necessary to make life 

 easy. In accordance with his directions, this prophetess proceeded to 

 bring together several scattered villages, create a new pattern of danc- 

 ing, order the selling of personal belongings to buy goods, and direct 

 the stealing of cattle from neighboring settlers for consumption during 

 festivals. Although her child was stillborn in May, she managed to 

 redirect the movement into new rites adopting Catholic elements. 

 Shortly after this the Canela were attacked, and several were killed and 

 others wounded by the settlers whose cattle they had been stealing. 



The prophetess, Maria, had predicted the enemy bullets would all 

 miss their mark because the culture hero would protect them. With 

 the total failure of her predictions and the death of several Canela, her 

 power and her cult movement became discredited. In 1963 the Canela 

 had been resettled, and when Crocker and his wife arrived in the field 

 they were able to study firsthand the effects of this drastic sequence of 

 events to which the Canela had been subjected. He is analyzing his 

 data in terms of three approaches: social, psychological, and ecological. 

 Socially, the Canela have been little affected by this traumatic move, 

 since their social system continues to function in their new external 

 social environment, to which they have adjusted with their usual and 

 remarkable flexibility. Psychologically, however, there is evidence of 

 a great deal of suppressed hostility which is likely to find an oudet in 

 the near future, both against themselves and against neighbors. So 

 far this hostility has affected in only minor ways their motivations and 

 outlook, but some Canela already are preferring helplessness and an 

 admission of failure to the creating of a new life. They blame their 

 predicament on civilization and not themselves. 



Ecologically the problems are much greater: because they have not 

 adjusted to the necessities of forest living and its greater need for sani- 

 tation, disease rates, especially tuberculosis, have risen sharply; having 

 failed to learn to hunt in the forest, they suffer from a scarcity of meat 

 and considerable undernourishment; and because many materials 

 available in the savannah, and needed to carry out their customary 

 practices or to keep certain taboos, are unavailable in the forest, a 




42 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



number of practices and related beliefs are rapidly being lost and con- 

 fidence and faith in their old traditions are being weakened. Crocker 

 has supplemented these field observations with extensive linguistic 

 work and kinship analysis, and a substantial series of photographs. His 

 field work, supported by the National Science Foundation and the 

 Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, is expected to 

 result in a major monograph. 



The opportunity for Crocker to make on-the-spot observations of 

 these rapid and traumatic changes is almost unique, as anthropologists 

 have so often been forced by circumstances to rely on secondhand 

 accounts or on interviews with survivors of such rapid changes, made 

 years after the events took place. His results will be of importance far 

 beyond any interest we have in the fate of this small group of Brazilian 

 Indians, as they will make clearer the processes by which human groups 

 respond to, adjust to, or break down under the impact of sudden, 

 overwhelming changes imposed from outside sources. Since much of 

 the world today is in the midst of rapid and unprecedented change, 

 any of his conclusions will have very wide significance. 



A very different type of field work is represented by the trip of Clifford 

 Evans and Betty J. Meggers to Brazil from October 5 to November 

 22, 1964. The teaching aspects of this trip, supported by the Fulbright 

 Commission, are described on page 50. In addition, they were able 

 to make an extensive inspection tour of departments of anthropology 

 at various universities and museums throughout Brazil in order to 

 determine needs and potentials for archeological research programs. 

 By becoming familiar at firsthand with the collections and facilities, 

 and, even more importantly, with the personnel, of Brazilian institutions, 

 they were able to lay a groundwork for a long-term cooperative program 

 in Brazilian archeology in which they will have the support and co- 

 operation of a large proportion of the promising younger Brazilian 

 scholars. Such a coordinated program will make possible the securing 

 of data under carefully planned conditions, strictly comparable and 

 useful to scholars elsewhere in Brazil and throughout the world. 



During the Brazilian trip, Evans and Meggers worked with Mario 

 Simoes at the Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi, Belem, Para, on sherds 

 from stratigraphic excavations at a locality on Marajo Island, not 

 investigated by them in their 1948-49 excavations there. The new 

 material could be interdigitated into the previously published sequence, 

 and they extended it back to earlier time periods with a substantial 

 amount of material. This new work is of special importance because 

 carbon samples were secured by Simoes and his coworker Napoleao 

 Figueiredo, to be tested at the carbon-dating laboratory of the Smith- 

 sonian's Radiation Biology Laboratory. The results, it is hoped, will 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS ANTHROPOLOGY 43 



provide the first absolute dates for the archeology of Marajo Island, a 

 key locality in the prehistory of the entire South American lowlands. 



A pre-doctoral fellowship from the Wenner-Gren Foundation for 

 Anthropological Research made it possible for Yoshio Onuki, of the 

 University of Tokyo Andes Expedition, to spend six months at the 

 Museum analyzing and studying a large collection of potsherds, received 

 from the University of Tokyo Andes Expedition through the courtesy 

 of its director, Professor Seiichi Izumi. It includes type specimens for 

 the entire range of Formative Period materials from the site of Kotosh 

 in the Department of Huanuco, Peru, and is of particular importance 

 for comparative purposes in view of the interest of Meggers, Evans, and 

 Flannery in the Formative Period of Mesoamerica and South America. 



From January to April 1965, Robert M. Laughlin was in Zinacantan, 

 Chiapas, Mexico, with support from the National Institute of Mental 

 Health, continuing his study of the Tzotzil Indians, one of the surviving 

 Maya-speaking descendants of the famous prehistoric Maya Indians of 

 Central America. He has concentrated on the elicitation, through 

 systematic procedures, of the entire vocabulary of the Tzotzil language, 

 both as a basis for a Tzotzil dictionary and, even more important, as a 

 means of determining the ideas, concepts, and attitudes that lie behind 

 the more visible and material segments of Tzotzil culture. Prior to 

 this field work, he continued the analysis of myth and dream material 

 previously collected, as a means of determining the values implicit in 

 Tzotzil culture. Both of these approaches are significant means of 

 securing data on the more intangible and frequently ignored aspects 

 of a primitive culture. 



Kent V. Flannery, who joined the staff on July 8, 1964, continued 

 research on both the Old and the New World with parallel programs 

 dealing with the beginnings of domestic plants and animals in two key 

 localities — southwestern Iran and central and southern Mexico. From 

 July through September he was at Rice University studying more than 

 10,000 identifiable bone fragments from prehistoric caves and villages 

 in the Deh Luran valley, Khuzistan, Iran. Shedding light on the 

 important problem of the beginnings of domestication of sheep, goat, 

 cattle, and the dog, these came from three archeological sites which 

 spanned the time from about 7900 B.C. through the beginnings of town 

 life about 4500 B.C. to the threshold of urban civilization about 3800 

 B.C. Among the important conclusions he reached is that agriculture 

 began in this region with the very small-scale, almost incidental, 

 growing of wheat and barley in forms closely related to their wild ances- 

 tors, and that only later were the techniques added by which farming 

 became the mainstay of life. He also concluded that goats were domes- 




44 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



ticated substantially earlier than sheep, the latter apparently being 

 imported from distant areas after their domestication there. The 

 botanist Hans Helbaek, working with the expedition, has shown through 

 the study of details of the flax seeds that irrigation of at least this crop, 

 and presumably of wheat and other crops as well, began some six 

 millennia before the Christian era in this region — much earlier than 

 had heretofore been suspected. 



In December 1964, with the cooperation of Mexican authorities, 

 and particularly of Ignacio Bernal, director of the Museo de Antro- 

 pologia in Mexico City, Flannery was able to visit many of the 200 

 already-located sites in the valley of Oaxaca. These will provide the 

 basis for a major archeological study of the beginnings of agriculture in 

 this area and of prehistoric human ecology during the centuries which 

 span the beginnings of village life and the growth of villages into towns, 

 and which led to the foundation of civilization in Mexico. Numerous 

 caves or rock shelters, appearing to cover the period from 6500-2500 

 B.C., were found. These assure abundant perishable archeological 

 materials such as corncobs, fragments of squash, cactus fruits, twine, 

 and so on. When plans now complete are carried out next year, the 

 study will parallel the important Tehuacan Project in which Flannery 

 and Richard B. Woodbury have both participated in previous years. 

 The intensive archeological study of key areas in such regions as Middle 

 America, through cooperative programs with botanists, zoologists, 

 archeologists, and others, is providing far fuller and more meaningful 

 data than have heretofore been available. Both in Flannery 's Iranian 

 work, now nearing completion, and in the contemplated work in Oaxaca, 

 close collaboration with other specialists within the Museum of Natural 

 History is proving extremely rewarding, as a result of the generosity 

 with which they make available their particular talents in a variety of 

 fields. 



Gus W. Van Beek made substantial progress on his study of South 

 Arabic ceramic technology and architecture in conjunction with the 

 preparation of his final report on the excavations at Jahar Bin Humeid. 



Before and after the meeting of the 7th International Congress of 

 Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences which he attended in 

 Moscow, August 3-10, Henry B. Collins studied museum collections 

 in Copenhagen, Stockholm, Helsinki, Moscow, Leningrad, and 

 Tblissi. Saul H. Riesenberg, who attended the same meetings, also 

 studied Pacific collections in several of the same museums. 



As part of a larger genetical study in conjunction with blood-group 

 researches on Pacific populations by the U.S. National Institutes of 

 Health and the Australian Commonwealth Serum Laboratories, 




Ethnologist William Crocker in the 

 field with an adopted Canela Indian 

 brother. (See pp. 40-42.) 



Below: Work and study room, divi- 

 sion of cultural anthropology. On 

 table in foreground are ethnological 

 and archeological specimens being 

 cataloged into the permanent records 

 of the Museum of Natural History. 





Exhibits dealing with political authority, music, and signaling were among 

 those added to the African section of the hall of cultures of Africa and Asia. 

 Others treated such subjects as weapons, clothing, control of the super- 

 natural, various hand-skills, and special ethnic groups. (See p. 98.) 




Sfc 



River Basin Surveys party screening debris at Bottleneck Cave, a small rock 

 shelter in the upper Yellowtail Reservoir, Bighorn River, Montana. (See 

 p. 47.) Below: The remains of two circular earth lodges excavated by a 

 RBS field party at Fort George Village, an 18th-century site in the Big Bend 

 Reservoir of central South Dakota. (See pp. 46-49.) 



«'<^M^H 






RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS ANTHROPOLOGY 45 



Riesenberg completed his research on migrations and movements of 

 people in Micronesia. He also carried forward his research projects 

 on Ponapean political organization and folklore. 



Gordon D. Gibson continued his researches on African material 

 culture as part of the preparation of new exhibits in the hall of African 

 cultures. 



J. Lawrence Angel continued, for the third and final year, his re- 

 study of senior medical students whom he first studied as freshmen 

 at the Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia. Changes in body 

 composition, blood serum make-up, body measurements, and external 

 appearance recorded in this study will clarify the process of differential 

 aging in man. 



Lucile E. Hoyme visited the Department of Anatomy, Washington 

 University Medical School, St. Louis, in November and December 

 1964, to make observations on about 175 human pelves of known 

 age and sex, to supplement data already recorded on U.S. Negro 

 pelves at Howard University and American Indian and Eskimo 

 specimens at the Museum of Natural History. 



Waldo R. Wedel continued research in the Plains during July and 

 August 1964, with support from a National Science Foundation grant. 

 Accompanied in the field by George S. Metcalf and Edgar W. Dodd, 

 his survey had two objectives: to clarify the relationships among 

 several late prehistoric and early historic Indian groups — those defined 

 for the Central Plains, for the upper Rio Grande area of New Mexico, 

 and the southern plains of Oklahoma; and to assess the nature of 

 ecological adjustments made by pre-white peoples in the transitional 

 zone where the subhumid eastern prairie plains environment gives 

 way to a semiarid short-grass or steppe environment on the west. 

 The area of study was selected because hitherto it has been little ex- 

 amined but is adjacent to better known areas providing material for 

 comparative study and cross dating. From a base camp in Kansas 

 at the Meade County State Game Farm, dune and blowout localities 

 along the Cimarron River and its tributaries as far west as the Colorado 

 line were checked. Visits were also made to the Crooked Creek 

 Valley and to localities on the Medicine Lodge River and on the Salt 

 Fork of the Arkansas River. 



In the western part of this area, where the Cimarron crosses the 

 High Plains, pottery-bearing sites were small and scarce, often with 

 little but a few sherds and flints. Grinding stones, however, and some 

 of the many chipped-stone tools suggest aboriginal occupation ranging 

 in time from the Archaic period of several thousand years ago to his- 

 toric times, the latter represented by iron arrow points. Fluted or 




46 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



lanceolate blades, indicative of Clovis and Folsom or of the Eden 

 and Scotts bluff complexes, respectively, were extremely scarce. 

 Non-pottery sites, marked by quantities of stone artifacts and refuse 

 and by clusters of hearth stones, were, however, surprisingly numerous, 

 apparently coming to light wherever the sandy soils along the Cimarron 

 have been blown away to expose former ground surfaces. 



Farther east, pottery-bearing sites with an inferred semihorticultural 

 subsistence basis included several that merit further study. These had 

 pottery identifiable as belonging to the Woodland period before about 

 A.D. 900, to the Central Plains complex of about 1000-1450, and to 

 the Dismal River complex of about 1650-1750. Pottery-bearing sites 

 tended to occur in the immediate vicinity of springs or other depend- 

 able surface water supplies, some of which have almost totally dried 

 up in the past 50 years, thus materially changing the appearance 

 of the landscape and its apparent potential for farming occupants. 

 Potsherds originating from the Pueblo settlements on the upper Rio 

 Grande were seen in local collections and were collected from a number 

 of sites visited; these are being examined by experts in New Mexico 

 for identification and dating. 



The general impression from the summer's work is that semiseden- 

 tary, probably horticultural settlements, more closely related to late 

 prehistoric cultures of central Oklahoma than to the Central Plains 

 cultures north of the Arkansas River, occurred at least as far west as 

 Meade County. Farther west were more transient economies based 

 primarily on seasonal hunting and gathering, with springs and ponds 

 as foci of human interest and with winter residence elsewhere than in 

 these treeless, windswept, inhospitable steppe lands. 



Special attention by aerial and ground reconnaissance was given to 

 the vicinity of Englewood, Kans., where traces remain of fairly extensive 

 irrigation systems no longer in use. Persistent local traditions and 

 archeological reports of the 1930's specify that these are, in part, of 

 prehistoric Indian origin. No evidence was found, however, either in 

 the remaining ditches themselves or in the scanty archeological sites of 

 the locality, to support the view that there was ever a prewhite popu- 

 lation sufficiently numerous, settled, or advanced technologically, to 

 have constructed such irrigation works as are now visible. 



River Basin Surveys 



As in previous years, by far the most extensive field activities in 

 archeology for the Smithsonian Institution were carried on by the 

 River Basin Surveys in the Missouri River Basin. This was their 19th 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — ANTHROPOLOGY 47 



year of continuous operation and again included large-scale excavation, 

 surveys of lesser known areas, processing and analysis of specimens from 

 excavations, and the preparation of reports of results. During the year 

 23 field parties worked within the Missouri Basin, of which 11 were 

 in the field in July, August, or September 1964, in the following places: 



1. The Sommers Site, Upper Big Bend Reservoir, S. Dak., one of 

 the largest in the reservoir area, with at least 50 house depressions but 

 unfortunately with heavy overburden, requiring the use of drag line 

 and bulldozer to reach house floors. 



2. The Fort George Site, a small fortified earth-lodge village near 

 Pierre, S. Dak. Both the pottery and the objects of glass, iron, and 

 brass suggested occupation in the first half of the 1 8th century, probably 

 by the protohistoric Arikara. 



3. The Ghapelle Creek Site, 20 miles downstream from Pierre, 

 where previous disturbance by amateur excavators and the rise of 

 water resulting in waterlogging, limited severely the extent of excavation. 



4. A number of sites on the right bank of the Missouri in the Upper 

 Big Bend Reservoir in which extensive test excavations suggested occu- 

 pation from the Middle Missouri period through the time of the 

 modern Dakota Indians. 



5. The Davis Site and the Larson Site near Mobridge, S. Dak. 

 At the latter, skeletons on the floors of the most recently occupied 

 houses and associated musket balls and copper arrow points indicated 

 clearly that occupation extended from prehistoric times into historic. 



6. The Stelzer Site, near Mobridge, the largest known Woodland 

 burial and occupation site along the middle Missouri. 



7. Calamity Village, also near Mobridge, a small site protected by 

 moats and palisades and located on a small spur of land overlooking 

 the river. 



8. Some 30 sites, either newly found or tested in accordance with 

 recommendations from previous years, in the Yellowtail Reservoir on 

 the Big Horn in southern Montana and northern Wyoming. The 

 most important of these was Bottleneck Cave, a deep rock shelter 

 containing at least five prehistoric occupations extending back to the 

 paleo-Indian time level. 



9. Several new sites were found on a shoreline survey of the west 

 bank of the Fort Randall Reservoir, S. Dak. The degree of damage 

 to surviving archeological sites by bank erosion was evaluated, and the 

 need for additional testing or excavation was determined. 



10. A survey in the Rathbun Reservoir on the Chariton River, 

 Iowa, with emphasis on the revisiting of previously known sites, par- 

 ticularly six major mound groups overlooking the flood plain. Exten- 




48 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



sive tests yielded stratigraphic information but no cultural material 

 serving to identify the mounds with a known complex or to date them. 

 1 1 . A brief reconnaissance of sites in the Upper Oahe Reservoir to 

 assess the needs for future excavation. 



In April, May, and June, 1965, 12 additional field parties undertook 

 field work, as follows: 



1. Survey of three reservoirs in eastern Kansas: the Onaga Reser- 

 voir on the Vermillion River, the Hillsdale Reservoir on the Osage 

 River, and the Garnett Reservoir on Pottawatomie Creek. 



2. A short reconnaissance of several Missouri River mainstem reser- 

 voirs: Gavins Point, Fort Randall, and Oahe, with special attention to 

 sites being actively eroded. 



3. The beginning of test excavation and large-scale work at a site 

 near Fort Yates in the Oahe Reservoir area. 



4. A 1965 continuation of work at the Sommers Site designed 

 especially to clear additional long rectangular houses, to test non- 

 residential areas, and to examine possible evidence of a defensive 

 perimeter. 



5. Excavations in the Upper Oahe Reservoir at another site with 

 large, long, rectangular houses. 



6. Work at Fort Manuel, an important fur-trade post in northern- 

 most South Dakota. 



7. A continuation in the Rathbun Reservoir, Iowa, of work begun 

 in the fall of 1964. 



8. Further work in the Upper Big Bend Reservoir where sites had 

 been damaged by recent construction or threatened by recreational 

 development of the area. 



9. Work in the Garrison Diversion Project of North Dakota, begun 

 late in the fiscal year to survey and test selected sites. 



10. A revisit to the Upper Yellowtail Reservoir to obtain palyno- 

 logical and soil samples from selected locations. 



1 1 . Work at the Aycock Site in the Oahe Reservoir. 



12. Work in the Upper Big Bend Reservoir. 



In addition to the field parties from the Lincoln office of the River 

 Basin Surveys, a number of institutions cooperated in 1964 in carrying 

 out significant field work in the Missouri Basin; these included Iowa 

 State University, Kansas State Historical Society, the University of 

 Missouri, the University of Nebraska, the Science Museum of the St. 

 Paul Institute, Minnesota, the State Historical Society of North Dakota, 

 and the State University of South Dakota. Each of these had field 

 parties carrying on salvage excavations or survey work in areas of 

 immediate concern to them. At the end of the fiscal year five cooper- 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS ANTHROPOLOGY 49 



ating institutions again had field parties in the Missouri Basin: the 

 University of Nebraska excavating in the Glen Elder and Milford 

 Reservoirs of Kansas; the University of Kansas working in the Perry, 

 Clinton, and Kirwin Reservoirs of Kansas; the Kansas State Historical 

 Society, also excavating in the Perry Reservoir; the University of Mis- 

 souri, continuing work in the Kaysinger Bluff and Stockton Reservoirs of 

 Missouri; and the State Historical Society of North Dakota, excavating 

 at the Shermer Site in the Oahe Reservoir. 



One of the important undertakings of the River Basin Surveys has 

 been the Missouri Basin Chronology Program which recently has in- 

 cluded, by cooperative agreement with the U.S. National Park Service, 

 a review of dendrochronological data on the Plains area, being carried 

 out by the Tree Ring Laboratory of the University of Arizona. Initial 

 indications are encouraging for the future development of dendro- 

 chronology in the Plains as a supplement to other less precise chrono- 

 logical systems. 



Other Scientific Activities 



Henry B. Collins continued to serve as a member of the Board of 

 Governors of the Arctic Institute of North America, which he helped 

 to found in 1945, and as chairman of the directing committee of its 

 comprehensive "Arctic Bibliography," in which are indexed and sum- 

 marized the contents of publications in all fields of science and all lan- 

 guages pertaining to the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions of the world. 

 Volume 12, prepared for publication during the year, will contain ab- 

 stracts in English of 7,270 papers and monographs, 94 percent of which 

 were published between 1960 and 1962. Of these, approximately half 

 are in English, almost as many in Russian, and the majority of the re- 

 mainder are Scandinavian, German, and French. Collins also con- 

 tinued as chairman of the advisory committee of the Institute's Rus- 

 sian Translation Project, which he organized in 1960. With a grant 

 from the National Science Foundation, the editing of the fifth volume 

 of the series, "The Archeology and Geomorphology of Northern 

 Asia: Selected Papers," was completed for publication by the Univer- 

 sity of Toronto Press in 1964; and a sixth volume, consisting of papers 

 on Siberian archeology, was expected before the end of 1965. Prior 

 to the merger of the Bureau of American Ethnology into the Smith- 

 sonian Office of Anthropology, Collins served for a year and a half 

 as Acting Director of the Bureau. 



W. H. Crocker continued as a contributing editor for South Amer- 

 ican ethnology for "The Handbook of Latin American Studies" of 




50 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



the Hispanic Foundation of the Library of Congress. In that capacity 

 he surveyed about 800 articles or books published from 1960 to 1964 

 in this particular field and prepared critical abstracts of over 400 of 

 the items for use in the Handbook. 



At the invitation of the Fulbright Commission of Brazil, C. Evans 

 and B. J. Meggers received travel grants in order to give in Brazil 

 an intensive training course on archeological method and interpre- 

 tation to a select group of Brazilian archeologists at the University 

 of Parana. This program, conducted October 5-30, 1964, was held 

 at the Museu Paranaguense de Arqueologia e Artes Populares in 

 Paranagua and at the Department of Anthropology at the Univer- 

 sity of Parana in Curitiba. It was held in seminar form, six days a 

 week. Mornings were devoted to lectures on archeological theory and 

 a review of the latest information on New World archeology. After- 

 noons were devoted to practical workshop sessions with specimens in 

 order to show methods of classifying pottery, of seriating sequences, 

 of writing pottery type descriptions, of reconstructing regional se- 

 quences, and of determining the cultural history of aboriginal 

 Brazil. Evenings were devoted to discussions of general problems 

 in Brazilian archeology, the planning of field research, and the or- 

 ganizing of common themes for study and presentation at the 1966 

 International Congress of Americanists to be held in Argentina. 



The seminar was highly successful, both in training and developing 

 the interest of a group of able young Brazilian archeologists, and in 

 providing the Smithsonian Institution with new contacts and an aware- 

 ness of current research in this region. The seminar also made possible 

 the planning of a comprehensive, long-range research program for 

 key areas of Brazil hitherto neglected or investigated only by outmoded, 

 inadequate methods that produce results not comparable with those 

 of other areas. The young scholars participating, it is hoped, will 

 be able to collaborate with Smithsonian archeologists in this program, 

 both carrying on their own research in Brazil and visiting the Museum 

 of Natural History for short periods for conferences and additional 

 training programs, and for comparative study of collections not avail- 

 able in Brazil. 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 1964 through June 1965 



Angel, J. Lawrence. Prehistoric man. In S. H. Engle, ed., New 

 perspectives in world history. 34th Yearbook, National Council 

 for the Social Studies, Washington, D.C., ch. 6, pp. 96-117, 1964. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS ANTHROPOLOGY 51 



. Osteoporosis: thalassemia? Amer. Journ. Phys. Anthrop., 



n.s., Vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 369-374, 1 pi., September 1964. 

 Baker, Paul T., and Angel, J. Lawrence. Old age changes in 



bone density: Sex and race factors in the United States. Human 



Biology, vol. 37, pp. 104-121, 1965. 

 Coe, Michael D., and Flannery, Kent V. The pre-Columbian 



obsidian industry of El Chayal, Guatemala. Amer. Antiquity, vol. 



30, no. 1, pp. 43-49, 3 figs., July 1964. 

 Collins, Henry B. Recent trends and developments in Arctic archae- 

 ology. Actes du VI Congres International des Sciences Anthro- 



pologiques et Ethnologiques, Paris, 1960. Tome II (premier 



volume), pp. 373-377, 1963. 

 . Paleo-Indian artifacts in Alaska: An example of cultural 



retardation in the Arctic. Anthrop. Pap. Univ. Alaska, vol. 10, 



no. 2, pp. 13-18, 1963. 

 . Man in the Arctic. In The Arctic basin. Arctic Inst. North 



America, pp. 191-195, 1963. 

 . The Arctic and Subarctic. In Jesse D. Jennings and Edward 



Norbeck, eds., Prehistoric man in the New World. Univ. Chicago 



Press, pp. 85-114, 1964. 

 . Introduction. In Franz Boas, The Central Eskimo. Bison 



Book Ed., Univ. Nebraska Press, pp. v-xi, 1964. 

 . James Louis Giddings (1909-1964) [Obituary]. Arctic, vol. 



18, no. 1, pp. 66-67, 1965. 



Crocker, William H. Conservatism among the Canela: an analysis 

 of contributing factors. In Actas y Memorias, XXXV Congreso 

 Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1962, vol. 3, pp. 341-346, 

 1964. 



Estrada, Emilio; Meggers, Betty J.; and Evans, Clifford. The 

 Jambeli culture of south coastal Ecuador. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 

 vol. 115, no. 3492, pp. 483-558, 1964. 



Evans, Clifford, and Meggers, Betty J. British Guiana archaeol- 

 ogy: A return to the original interpretations. Amer. Antiquity, 

 vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 83-84, 1964. 



Flannery, Kent V. The middle formative of the Tehuacan valley: 

 its pattern and place in Mesoamerican prehistory. 224 pp. -j- 

 appendices (128 pp.), 34 illus., Univ. Chicago Microfilms, 1964. 



. The ecology of early food production in Mesopotamia. 



Science, vol. 147, no. 3663, pp. 1247-1256, March 12, 1965. 



Hole, Frank; Flannery, Kent V.; and Neely, James. Early agri- 

 culture and animal husbandry in Deh Luran, Iran. Current 

 Anthrop., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 105-106, February 1965. 




52 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Meggers, Betty J., and Evans, Clifford. Especulaciones sobre rutas 

 tempranas de difusion de la ceramica entre Sur y Mesoamerica. 

 In Hombre y Cultura, Revista del Centro de Investigaciones 

 Antropologicas de la Universidad Nacional, tomo I, no. 3, pp. 1-15, 

 December 1964. 



Stephenson, Robert L. Quaternary human occupation of the plains. 

 In Quaternary of the U.S., eds. H. E. Wright and David G. Frey. 

 Princeton Univ. Press, pp. 685-696, 1965. 



Stewart, T. D. Shanidar skeletons IV and VI. Sumer, vol. 19, nos. 

 1-2, pp. 8-26, 14 pp. of figs., 1963. 



. Ales Hrdlicka, pioneer American physical anthropologist. 



In The Czechoslovak Contribution to World Culture, ed. Miloslav 

 Rechcigl, Jr. Mouton & Co., The Hague, pp. 505-509, 1964. 



Sturtevant, William C. Studies in ethnoscience. In Transcultural 

 studies in cognition, eds. A. K. Romney and R. G. D'Andrade. 

 Amer. Anthrop., vol. 66, no. 3, part 2, pp. 99-131, 1964 (spec, 

 publ.). 



. Mutilations and deformations. Encyclopaedia Britannica, 



vol. 16, pp. 1106-1107, 1965. 



. Tattooing. Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 21, p. 834, 1965. 



, Diamond, Stanley, and Fenton, W. N. Memorandum 



submitted to subcommittees on Indian affairs of the Senate and 

 House of Representatives. Amer. Anthrop., vol. 66, no. 3, pp' 

 631-633. {Also in "Kinzua dam," 88th Cong., 1st Sess., H.R., 

 Comm. on Int. and Ins. Affairs, Comm. print ser. 6, pp. 504-505, 

 1964, and "Kinzua dam," 88th Cong., 2d Sess., Senate, Comm. 

 on Int. and Ins. Affairs, Comm. print, pp. 109-111, 1964.) 



-, Fairbanks, Charles H., and Rouse, Irving, eds. Indian and 



Spanish: Selected writings by John M. Goggin. Univ. Miami 

 Press, Coral Gables, 329 pp., 1964. 



Van Beek, Gus W. Frankincense and myrrh. In The Bibilical Archae- 

 ologist Reader 2. Anchor Book A250b, pp. 99-126, 1964. (Re- 

 printed from Biblical Archaeologist, vol. 23, no. 3, 1960.) 



, Cole, Glen H., and Jamme, A. An archeological reconnais- 

 sance in Hadhramaut, South Arabia — a preliminary report. In 

 Ann. Rep. of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian 

 Institution, 1963, pp. 521-545, 1964. 



Wedel, Waldo R. Primitive man. In Hugo G. Rodeck, ed., Natural 

 history of the Boulder area. Univ. Colorado Museum, leaflet no. 

 13, pp. 90-96, 1964. 



. Visit to Caribou, 1963. Colorado Magazine, vol. 41, no. 3, 



pp. 247-252, 1964. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 53 



Woodbury, Richard B., and Woodbury, Nathalie F. S. The chang- 

 ing pattern of Papago land use. In Actas y Memorias, XXXV 

 Congreso International de Americanistas, Mexico, 1962, vol. 2, 

 pp. 181-186, 1964. 



. [Review]. Handbook of Middle American Indians, vol. 1, 



ed. Robert G. West. Science, vol. 148, pp. 798-800, 1965. 



VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



Although the horizons of research in vertebrate zoology are con- 

 tinually expanding, this does not reduce the importance of taxonomic 

 studies at the "alpha" level in many groups, nor does it eliminate the 

 continuing need for field collecting, particularly in less well-known 

 parts of the world, such as the tropics. 



Fishes are taxonomically the least well-known vertebrates, and re- 

 search on this group involves to a great extent the description of new 

 forms and revisions at the generic and higher levels. Victor G. 

 Springer is carrying out revisionary studies of blennioid fishes and re- 

 cently completed the examination of material for a world revision of 

 the genus Entomacrodus. This work is one of the few intensive studies 

 of a circumglobal genus of marine shore fishes based on abundant 

 material. 



William R. Taylor is studying speciation, relationships, morphology, 

 and distribution of several families of marine and freshwater catfishes. 



Stanley H. Weitzman's current and projected research includes 

 studies on the morphology and evolution of stomiatoid fishes, especially 

 the deep-sea fish families Astronesthidae, Melanostomiatidae, and 

 Gonostomatidae. He is also continuing work on the morphology, 

 evolution, and classification of the large South American and African 

 suborder of freshwater characi fishes, Characoidei. 



Robert H. Gibbs, Jr., and several colleagues are studying the bathy- 

 pelagic fishes collected on two north-south transects in the western 

 Indian Ocean during two cruises of the International Indian Ocean 

 Expedition. The relationship of the distribution of species to physico- 

 chemical and biological properties of the oceans is receiving much 

 attention. Gibbs also neared completion of an ecological analysis of 

 pelagic oceanic fishes, collected 1956-1960 from the M/V Delaware, 

 and continued study of Atlantic Ocean flyingfishes. 



Ernest A. Lachner recently completed a study of certain North 

 American barbel minnows. Robert E. Jenkins, graduate student, 

 Cornell University, and Robert Ross, professor at Virginia Polytechnic 

 Institute, over the past several years have amassed thousands of speci- 



789-427—66 9 




54 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



mens from central Appalachia using electric shocking devices. Jenkins 

 and Lachner have analyzed the river populations of these nest-building 

 chubs (genus Hybopsis, subgenus Nocomis). Their studies concern the 

 ecology, distribution, origin, and dispersal of the several species and 

 their infraspecific populations in relation to preglacial and postglacial 

 stream captures and avenues of dispersal. 



In the division of reptiles and amphibians a major manuscript on 

 the frogs of Colombia was completed by Doris M. Cochran in collabo- 

 ration with Coleman J. Goin of the University of Florida. 



James A. Peters is studying the systematics and ecology of the reptiles 

 and amphibians of Ecuador, including analysis of the results of six 

 ecological transects made through the Subalpine, Transition, Cloud 

 Forest, Subtropical, and Tropical Zones of the eastern slopes of the 

 Andes. The area, almost totally unknown ecologically, is an evolution- 

 ary microcosm, with striking examples of barrier formation and accom- 

 panying speciation, altitudinal zonation, ecological indicator species, 

 population al and community differentiation, and micro-faunules. 

 Field studies in Ecuador of comparative cardiac physiology (with 

 Robert Mullen, supported by the National Institutes of Health) re- 

 sulted in the first known electrocardiograms of caecilians, the rare 

 legless amphibians, and a large series of electrocardiograph records of 

 Ecuadorian snakes and lizards, which will ultimately provide a contri- 

 bution to physio-ecological studies of phylogenetic relationships. 



Peters also published a dictionary which contains over 3500 words 

 and terms descriptive of the biology of the reptiles and amphibians, 

 including material drawn from such other disciplines as behavior, 

 genetics, ecology, physiology, and pathology, as well as systematics 

 and morphology. 



Research on birds has a strong ecological orientation, with empha- 

 sis on sea birds in four of the world's oceans and land birds in Latin 

 America. 



George E. Watson has developed a cooperative research program 

 with the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries to study the distribution, 

 abundance, and behavior of sea birds in association with fish schools in 

 the tropical Atlantic Ocean. He participated in a cruise aboard the 

 Bureau ship Geronimo in the Gulf of Guinea in August and aboard the 

 Woods Hole research vessel Atlantis II off northern South America from 

 October to December. These resulted in the production of an illus- 

 trated preliminary identification manual designed to facilitate collection 

 of reliable data on the distribution of pelagic birds. With J. Phillip 

 Angle as assistant, Watson is working on a similar manual for Antarctic 

 birds on a grant from the National Science Foundation. They gathered 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 55 



data aboard the aircraft carrier Croaton, used as a mobile launch facility 

 by NASA, off the west coast of South America in April. Frank B. Gill, 

 research assistant, returned to the United States after 1 5 months on the 

 International Indian Ocean Expedition. 



The Pacific Ocean Biological Survey Program, of which Philip S. 

 Humphrey is the principal investigator, reached the end of its first 

 phase of general survey work at the end of June 1965. An inventory of 

 the terrestrial organisms and seasonal variations in their distribution 

 and abundance has been made in the study area, and preparation has 

 begun for a series of survey reports on an island-by-island basis. 



Humphrey's other research activities during the year mostly con- 

 cerned studies of the distribution and ecology of Latin American birds. 

 He continued field studies of the ecological and seasonal distribution 

 of birds and arboviruses in the tropical rain forest in cooperation with 

 Robert E. Shope of the Belem Virus Laboratory in Brazil under a grant 

 from the Rockefeller Foundation. During the dry season they gathered 

 comparative ecological data in the same study area used during the 

 rainy season in 1963. Humphrey also continued his research on 

 Patagonian birds, assisted by David Bridge. 



Paul Slud, a specialist in tropical ecology, joined the staff in July 1964 

 and left almost immediately for a year of field work in Costa Rica. 

 He is part of a team working on a bioecological classification for mili- 

 tary environments supported by the Army Research Office. An im- 

 portant objective has been to study a variety of habitats in detail in 

 order to classify and predict plant formations and the distribution of 

 birds. 



Alexander Wetmore continued his studies of birds of the Isthmus of 

 Panama and was in the field from January through March. 



Richard L. Zusi made considerable research progress in functional 

 anatomy and adaptation, completing in collaboration with Robert W. 

 Storer of the University of Michigan one manuscript comparing head 

 and neck anatomy in the pied-billed grebe with that of the rare giant 

 pied- bill, and another on the mechanism of kinetics in the bird skull. 

 His other studies in progress include adaptive radiation in shorebirds, 

 for which he obtained useful data and motion pictures during field 

 work in Kansas and Florida. He is working on a joint study of the 

 evolution of the woodhewers, a group of tropical American tree-trunk 

 climbing birds, with Paul Slud, who has contributed specimens and field 

 observations from Costa Rica. 



In mammals, research is oriented mostly toward studies of tropical 

 faunas which are far less well-known than those of temperate areas. 

 Much of this work is done in cooperation with specialists of other 




56 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



disciplines. For example, Henry W. Setzer works extensively with 

 parasitologists in his faunal studies, supported by the Office of the 

 Surgeon General, Department of the Army. This year he conducted 

 field work in Mozambique in July and August, and throughout the 

 year he supervised a field team working in Iran and Pakistan and two 

 others working in Mozambique and Bechuanaland, each including 

 entomologists as well as mammalogists. 



In cooperation with Vernon Tipton, Brooke Army Medical Center, 

 Fort Sam Houston, Tex., Charles O. Handley, Jr., began work on a 

 study of the distribution and ecology of mammalian ectoparasites, 

 arboviruses, and their hosts in Venezuela, with support by the Office 

 of the Surgeon General. On the project staff are 11 parasitologists, a 

 virologist, and an ecologist. With support from the National Science 

 Foundation, Handley also directed field work in Panama and in the 

 southeastern United States. 



David H. Johnson is studying some of the Far Eastern species of the 

 genus Rattus as a part of a comprehensive study of the mammals of 

 southeastern Asia. 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 7964 through June 1965 



Cochran, Doris M., and Goin, Coleman J. Description of a new frog 

 of the genus Phyllobates from Colombia (Amphibia, Ranidae, Den- 

 drobatinae). Senck. Biol., vol. 45, pp. 255-257, 1 fig., December 1, 

 1964. 



Collette, Bruce B., and Gibbs, Robert H., Jr. Thunnus South, 1845 

 (Pisces): proposed validation under the plenary powers. Z.N.(S.) 

 1652. Bull. Zool. Nomencl., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 442-443, 1964. 



Deignan, Herbert G. A new race of the Alpine accentor, Prunella 

 collaris, from Formosa. NAMRU-II Res. Rep. MR005.09- 

 1601.3.26, 3 pp., June 1964. 



. Birds of the Arnhem Land expedition. In Records of the 



American-Australian scientific expedition to Arnhem Land, vol. 

 4 (zoology), pp. 345-425, October 1964. 



Parrotbill (1). In A new dictionary of birds, ed. Sir A. Lans- 



borough Thomson. Nelson, London, pp. 602-603, 1964. 



Notes on the nomenclature of the whistling-thrushes. Bull. 



Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 85, pp. 3-4, January 1965. 

 Friedmann, Herbert. Evolutionary trends in the avian genus 

 Clamator. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 146, no. 4, pp. 1-127, 

 October 30, 1964. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 57 



Garrick, J. A. F.; Backus, Richard H.; and Gibbs, Robert H., Jr. 



Carcharinus floridanus, the silky shark, a synonym of C. falciformis. 



Gopeia, 1964, no. 2, pp. 369-375, 5 figs., 1964. 

 Gibbs, Robert H., Jr. Family Astronesthidae. In Fishes of the 



western North Atlantic. Sears Found. Mar. Res., Mem. I, part 4, 



pp. 311-350, 15 figs., 1964. 

 . Family Idiacanthidae. In Fishes of the western North 



Atlantic. Sears Found. Mar. Res., Mem. I, part 4, pp. 512-522, 



4 figs., 1964. 

 Humphrey, Philip S. The swallows. In Song and garden birds of 



North America, by Alexander Wetmore and other ornithologists, 



National Geographic Society, Washington, pp. 121-130, 1964. 

 Jenkins, Robert E., and Lachner, Ernest A. The distribution and 



dispersal of the cyprinid fishes of the subgenus Nocomis (genus 



Hybopsis) in the central Atlantic states. Abstr. Pap. Pres. 44th 



Ann. Meet. Amer. Soc. Ichthy. and Herp., p. 20, 1964. 

 Johnson, David H. Mammals of the Arnhem Land expedition. In 



Records of the American-Australian scientific expedition to Arn- 

 hem Land, vol. 4 (zoology), pp. 427-515, pis. 3-16, October 1964. 

 Jones, J. Knox, Jr., and Johnson, David H. Synopsis of the lago- 



morphs and rodents of Korea. Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat. 



Hist., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 357-407, February 12, 1965. 

 Lachner, Ernest A., and Jenkins, Robert E. New cyprinid fishes 



(genus Hybopsis, subgenus Nocomis) of eastern United States. Abstr. 



Pap. pres. 44th Ann. Meet. Amer. Soc. Ichthy. and Herp., p. 23, 



1964. 

 Morrow, James E., Jr., and Gibbs, Robert H., Jr. Family Melano- 



stomiatidae. In Fishes of the western North Atlantic. Sears 



Found. Mar. Res., Mem. I, part 4, pp. 351-511, 45 figs., 1964. 

 Peters, James A. Dictionary of herpetology. Hafner Publ. Co., 



New York and London, pp. xi and 292, 30 figs., 1964. 

 . The lizard genus Ameiva in Ecuador. Bull. Southern 



California Acad. Sci., vol. 63, part 3, pp. 57-67, 1964. 



Supplemental notes on snakes of the subfamily Dipsadinae 



(Reptilia: Colubridae). Beitr. zur Neotropischen Fauna, vol. 4, 



no. 1, pp. 45-50, 1964. 

 Schultz, Leonard P. Three new species of frogfishes from the 



Indian and Pacific oceans with notes on other species (family 



Antennariidae) . Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 116, no. 3500, pp. 



171-182, pis. 1-3, September 1, 1964. 

 . Family Sternoptychidae. In Fishes of the western North 



Atlantic. Sears Found. Mar. Res., Mem. I, part 4, pp. 241-273, 



1964. 




58 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Short, Lester L., Jr., and Banks, R. G. Louisiana waterthrush in 



Baja California. Condor, vol. 67, p. 188, 1965. 

 Slud, Paul. The birds of Costa Rica. Distribution and ecology. 



Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., vol. 128, pp. 1-430, 3 maps, 1964. 

 — ■ . [Review]. Seasonal activity and ecology of the avifauna of 



an American equatorial cloud forest, by Alden H. Miller. Auk, 



vol. 81, pp. 444-446, 1964. 

 Springer, Victor G. A revision of the carcharhinid shark genera 



Scoliodon, Loxodon, and Rhizoprionodon. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 



vol. 115, no. 3493, pp. 559-632, 1964. 

 . [Review]. Revised classification of the blennioid fishes of 



the American family Chaenopsidae, by J. S. Stephens, Jr. 



Copeia, 1964, no. 3, pp. 591-593, 1964. 

 and Garrick, J. A. F. A survey of vertebral numbers in sharks. 



Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 116, no. 3496, pp. 73-96, 1964. 

 and Rosenblatt, Richard H. A new blennioid fish of the 



genus Labrisomus from Ecuador, with notes on the Caribbean 

 species L. filamentosus. Copeia, 1965, no. 1, pp. 25-27, 1965. 



Taylor, William R. Comment on the proposed rejection of Curimata 

 Walbaum, 1792. Bull. Zool. Nomencl., vol. 21, pp. 260-261, 

 1964. 



. Fishes of Arnhem Land. In Records of the American- 

 Australian scientific expedition to Arnhem Land, vol. 4 (zoology), 

 pp. 45-307, 73 figs., October 1964. 



Watson, George E. Preliminary Smithsonian identification man- 

 ual: seabirds of the tropical Atlantic Ocean. Smithsonian Insti- 

 tution, xxvii -f- 108 pp., 12 pis., 1965. 



Weitzman, Stanley H. One new species and two redescriptions of 

 catfishes of the South American callichthyid genus Corydoras. 

 Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 116, no. 3498, pp. 115-126, 1964. 



. Fishes of subfamilies Lebiasininae and Erythrininae with 



special reference to subtribe Mannostomina. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 

 vol. 116, no. 3499, pp. 127-170, 1964. 



Wetmore, Alexander, with other ornithologists. Song and garden 

 birds of North America. National Geographic Society, Washing- 

 ton, pp. 1-400, 550 illus., 1964. 



. Aves. In New Paris No. 4: A Pleistocene cave deposit in 



Bedford County, Pennsylvania, John E. Guilday, Paul S. Martin, 

 and Allen D. McCrady. Bull. Nat. Speleol. Soc, vol. 26, p. 134, 

 October 1964. 



. Screamer. In A new dictionary of birds, ed. Sir A. Lans- 



borough Thomson. Nelson, London, pp. 718-719, 1 fig., 1964. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 59 



-. Seriema. In A new dictionary of birds, ed. Sir A. Lans- 



borough Thomson. Nelson, London, p. 724, 1964. 

 . Tody. In A new dictionary of birds, ed. Sir A. Lansborough 



Thomson. Nelson, London, pp. 824-825, 1 fig., 1964. 

 . Aves. In L. S. B. Leakey, Olduvai gorge 1951-61, vol. 1, 



pp. 71-72, 1965. 



INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



Invertebrate animals are still so little known with respect to their kinds 

 and diversity, their distributions, and the mechanisms that control these 

 distributions, that much research in invertebrate zoology is necessarily 

 fundamental and exploratory. It is still preoccupied with "alpha" 

 taxonomy — the exploratory phases of systematics. The range of this 

 research exploration extends from the Antarctic to the Arctic and 

 includes all of the oceans of the world. Some of the activities de- 

 scribed below illustrate the nature of the department's research and 

 predict the far-reaching conclusions which someday may follow these 

 preliminary studies. 



The International Indian Ocean Expedition, concluded this year, has 

 provided a unique opportunity for American zoologists to cooperate in 

 a full-time biological effort in one of the least known areas of the world. 

 Many members of the department have participated. Joseph Rose- 

 water completed a study of the tridacnid clams of the Indo-Pacific, in 

 part based upon the collections made during participation in Te Vega 

 Cruise A and earlier observations made at Eniwetok Atoll. He is now 

 considering the littorinid snails of the Indo-Pacific region, using these 

 same collections and others from western Malaysia, Thailand, and the 

 islands south of Sumatra. Charles E. Cutress, Jr., who collected exten- 

 sively along the Indian coast in 1963, has been describing certain of the 

 sea anemones. 



Louis S. Kornicker, aboard Te Vega for Cruise B during early 1964, 

 collected from Ceylon to the Maldive Islands. He returned in Novem- 

 ber and December to cruise the East African coast and the coral reefs 

 of the western Indian Ocean aboard Anton Bruun on Cruise 9. The 

 myodocopid ostracods he obtained will provide the nucleus for study 

 of these little-known forms in the Indian Ocean. To provide com- 

 parative materials for his studies, Kornicker also collected from 

 the Bahamas and other areas from which few reference materials exist 

 in most museum collections. 



Museum technician T. Peter Lowe made important and significant 

 collections of deep-water corals from south of the Malagasy Republic. 




60 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



These specimens provide an index to the northern boundary of the 

 Southern Ocean fauna under study by Donald F. Squires. Although 

 temperatures at great depths in the ocean are quite low, there appears 

 to be a clear-cut faunal demarcation between a "deep-water tropical 

 fauna" and the deep-water corals of the Southern Ocean. Lowe also 

 collected reef corals from some of the more southerly coral reefs during 

 stops at ports in the Malagasy Republic. 



Among the many intriguing studies of marine invertebrates are those 

 concerned with planktonic faunas, for these organisms live throughout 

 their lives in a medium in motion and therefore are dynamic both 

 spatially and temporally. Thomas E. Bowman, in his analysis of the 

 planktonic copepod crustaceans, has been considering the striking zona- 

 tion of species which occurs in an inshore-offshore progression. The 

 zones appear to represent a series of communities which replace each 

 other from shallow neritic to deeper oceanic waters. Each of these 

 faunas inhabits water masses having potentially definable physical 

 characteristics; therefore, they are indicators of these water bodies. 

 Studies made on the distribution of two species of a genus of planktonic 

 shrimp indicate that these striking and easily identifiable forms could 

 be used for very rapid identification of some of these water bodies. 

 The results of this study have potential importance in understanding 

 the ecological basis of the fisheries off the southeastern coast of the 

 United States. Incidental to this research, Bowman has been con- 

 sidering the distribution of certain aquatic cave isopods from various 

 regions of the Americas, and he presented a paper on the evolution of 

 these forms to the Society of Systematic Zoology. 



Western Atlantic stomatopods, which may become important as a 

 food source, were subjected to further study by Raymond B. Manning, 

 who is concluding his monographic treatment of this group. An ex- 

 tension of these studies to the eastern Atlantic was made possible by his 

 participation, both this year and last year, in cruises to the Gulf of 

 Guinea aboard the University of Miami research vessel Pillsbury. His 

 studies include investigations of the planktonic larvae of the stomato- 

 pods. In conjunction with his field-based studies, Manning completed 

 a revision of the Australian and New Zealand stomatopods. 



Other studies of the invertebrates of the eastern United States region 

 were carried out by Meredith L. Jones, Marian H. Pettibone, and W. 

 Duane Hope. Jones, who continues his long-range program of research 

 upon the tropical polychaete faunas, engaged in field work in the area 

 of Margarita Island, Venezuela, and off Key West, Fla. He also com- 

 pleted an analysis of the spatial distribution of some marine benthic 

 invertebrates in San Francisco Bay, Calif. Such an analysis, made 




Specimens lent for study by other scientists in the United States and abroad are 

 either sealed in cans or placed in plastic bags before being boxed. Below: 

 Well-illuminated, accessible shelves for storage of wet collections of marine 

 invertebrates have white vinyl lining to increase effective illumination at 

 all levels. (See p. 88.) 




In Tonga, members of the biology class of Tonga College were recruited by 

 Curator Harald Rehder to collect mollusks from the flat behind the raised 

 Ha'ateiho Reef on Tongatapu. Below: In the laboratory, Rehder makes 

 initial identifications of mollusks collected in the Pacific islands. (See 

 p. 62.) 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 61 



upon collections taken with a special sampling device, permits a better 

 understanding of the community structure of small organisms and may 

 ultimately give us insight into some aspects of their behavior, but 

 it can be carried out only in those areas where the organisms are 

 sufficiently well known to permit identifications. 



It is toward this higher level of understanding that research such as 

 that of Pettibone is directed. She continues her detailed studies of the 

 polychaetes of the New England region, extending from Nova Scotia 

 south to Cape Hatteras, and is preparing another in her series of mono- 

 graphs on this fauna. Polychaete worms, which constitute a large pro- 

 portion, by mass, of animals in many marine environments, are poorly 

 known and difficult to study. It is only through long-range projects 

 resulting in monographic taxonomic treatments for the identification 

 of these animals that other biological studies can progress. 



Revisional studies are often possible only after long experience with 

 the fauna of a region or with a smaller group of organisms with which 

 one has had vast experience. The summary of a lifetime of work with 

 such a group is the objective of research associate Waldo L. Schmitt, 

 who is studying the New World species of pinnotherid crabs. This 

 study, in which Schmitt brings together what is known of the diversity 

 and distribution of these crabs, will permit a better understanding of 

 their position in the evolution of the Crustacea and make possible mean- 

 ingful studies of their ecology and their role in the marine environment. 



The work of systematics often extends beyond descriptive analyses of 

 species. W. Duane Hope has been considering seasonal distribution of 

 marine nematode worms in the Woods Hole, Mass., region. The nema- 

 tode fauna reflects the variable seasonal environments, as well as local, 

 stable habitats which might be due to a single aberrant ecological 

 parameter, such as the sediment type. A description of a fauna such 

 as the nematodes, in this region, requires, therefore, a knowledge of 

 distribution mechanisms, as well as of the methods by which the indi- 

 vidual species may be recognized. This program of research has been 

 underway since September, when Hope joined the departmental staff, 

 and is being conducted in cooperation with the Systematics-Ecology 

 Program of the Marine Biological Laboratory of Woods Hole. 



J. Laurens Barnard, whose association with the Smithsonian began 

 in August, has continued his studies of the benthic amphipods of the 

 California coast, particularly those of the intertidal zone from Monterey 

 Bay, Calif., to Bahia de los Angeles in Baja California. Upon comple- 

 tion of this study, which is expected early next year, Barnard will 

 commence investigations of the benthic Antarctic amphipods. 



Broad-scale zoogeographic studies such as that to be commenced by 

 Barnard are already underway in the Antarctic region, or more 



789-427—66 11 




62 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



properly in the Southern Ocean (the southern portions of the Atlantic, 

 Pacific, and Indian Oceans), by David L. Pawson and Donald F. 

 Squires. Pawson has been concerned with the systematics and distri- 

 bution of holothuroids (sea cucumbers) and echinoids (sea urchins), 

 particularly those of the New Zealand and Australian regions. Squires' 

 long-range program on Southern Ocean corals likewise has been con- 

 centrated in the above regions. But both investigators expect to ex- 

 tend their area of interest into the Southern Pacific, which is virtually 

 unknown biologically. The emphasis on the New Zealand and Aus- 

 tralian regions is not accidental, for New Zealand lies athwart the 

 boundary between the subtropical and sub-Antarctic faunas, and the 

 relationship between the faunas of New Zealand and those of the 

 Antarctic sheds light on the paths of migration of these faunas and on 

 their history. 



It is well known that faunas are most diverse toward the center of 

 their distribution but become attenuated or less diverse near the periph- 

 ery. Only the more hardy species can live in the often marginal 

 ecological conditions which exist in peripheral regions. The applica- 

 tion of this principle to the molluscan faunas of the marginal tropical 

 Pacific areas is the subject of research by Harald A. Rehder. The 

 immensely diverse molluscan faunas found in the tropical coral reefs 

 of the Pacific Ocean become less diverse in the island groups on the 

 edge of the coral-reef area. The diminution of these faunas reflects 

 their isolation, as well as their more severe environments; knowledge of 

 the diversity and composition of the faunas is essential for an under- 

 standing of the causes of such diminution. To accumulate the data for 

 his studies, Rehder spent four months in southeastern Polynesia and 

 supervises a continuing program of field collection. 



Although the major interest of the department is in the marine forms 

 of life, there has been some activity toward better understanding of 

 freshwater and terrestrial species. Horton H. Hobbs, Jr., who has 

 been engaged in studies of the evolutionary history of crayfish and their 

 commensal entocytherid ostracods, has engaged in a project on the 

 freshwater and terrestrial decapods of the Antillean Islands. A report 

 being prepared jointly with Fenner A. Chace, Jr., deals with the fauna 

 of Dominica, surveyed as a part of the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian 

 biological survey of Dominica. This work is a continuation of studies 

 of the North American crayfishes and those of the Mexican region 

 which have doubled the known species of these important organisms, 

 used frequently in experimental and behavioral studies. In connection 

 with his taxonomic studies, Hobbs conducted field work in the south- 

 eastern United States, particularly in Louisiana. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 63 



Joseph P. E. Morrison, who continues work upon brackish-water 

 mollusks, also collected in the southeastern United States and the U.S. 

 Virgin Islands. Mrs. Mildred Stratton Wilson, who has been mono- 

 graphing the freshwater calanoid copepod crustaceans of North Amer- 

 ica, in an attempt to develop a geographic and physiographic index to 

 the faunal composition of individual bodies of water, had her work 

 delayed as a result of damage to her laboratory and library in the 

 Alaskan earthquake of 1964. 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 1964 through June 1965 



Bowman, Thomas E. Mysidopsis almyra, a new estuarine mysid crus- 

 tacean from Louisiana and Florida. Tulane Studies in Zool., 

 vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 15-18, 1964. 



. Antrolana lira, a new genus and species of troglobitic cirolanid 



isopod from Madison Cave, Virginia. Internat. Journ. Speleol., 

 vol. 1, parts 1-2, pp. 229-236, pis. 50-57, 1964. 



. An arostrate population of the copepod Acartia lilljeborgii 



Giesbrecht (Calanoida: Acartiidae) from St. Lucia, West Indies. 

 Crustaceana, vol. 8, part 2, pp. 149-152, 1965. 



-. A bloom of the planktonic blue-green alga, Trichodesmium 



crythraeum, in the Tonga Islands. Limnology and Oceanography, 

 vol. 10, pp. 291-293, 1965. 



Clark, Ailsa M. On the identity of Clypeaster rosaceus (Linnaeus). . . . 

 Bull. Zool. Nomencl., vol. 21, pp. 297-302, 1964. 



Hobbs, Horton H., Jr. A new cave-dwelling crayfish from the Green- 

 brier drainage system, West Virginia (Decapoda, Astacidae). 

 Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 77, pp. 189-194, 10 figs., 1964. 



and Bedinger, M. S. A new troglobitic crayfish of the genus 



Cambarus (Decapoda, Astacidae) from Arkansas with a note on 

 the range of Cambarus cryptodytes Hobbs. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washing- 

 ton, vol. 77, pp. 9-15, 11 figs., 1964. 



and Villalobos, Alejandro. Los cambarinos de Cuba. 



Ann. Inst. Biol. Univ. Nac. Mexico, vol. 34, nos. 1-2, pp. 307-366, 



5 maps, 50 figs., 1964. 

 Kornicker, Louis S. A seasonal study of living Ostracoda in a Texas 



bay adjoining the Gulf of Mexico. In Publ. Zool. Stat. Naples, 



1965, vol. 33, suppl., pp. 45-60, 1965. 

 . Ecology of Ostracoda in the northwestern part of the Great 



Bahama Bank. In Publ. Zool. Stat. Naples, 1965, vol. 33, suppl., 



pp. 345-360, 1965. 




64 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Kornicker, Louis S. and King, Charles E. A new species of lumi- 

 nescent Ostracoda from Jamaica, West Indies. Micropaleontology, 

 vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 105-110, 1965. 



Northcote, T. G.; Wilson, Mildred S.; and Hurn, D. R. Some 

 characteristics of Nitinat Lake, an inlet on Vancouver Island, 

 British Columbia. Journ. Fish. Res. Board Canada, vol. 21, no. 5, 

 pp. 1069-1081, 3 figs., September 1964. 



Pawson, D. L. The Holothuroidea collected by the Royal Society 

 expedition to southern Chile, 1958-1959. Pacific Sci., vol. 18, no. 

 4, pp. 453-470, 1964. 



. The echinoid genus Caenopedina in New Zealand. Trans. 



Roy. Soc. New Zealand (zool.), vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 63-66, 1 pi., 5 figs., 

 1964. 



. A new cidaroid from New Zealand waters. Trans. Roy. Soc. 



New Zealand (zool.), vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 67-70, 1 pi., 4 figs., 1964. 

 . New sea-cucumbers from New Zealand waters. Rec. Do- 

 minion Mus. Wellington, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 75-82, 19 figs., 1965. 

 . Some echinozoans from north of New Zealand. Trans. Roy. 



Soc. New Zealand (zool.), vol. 5, no. 15, pp. 197-224, 1965. 

 and Fell, H. Barraclough. A revised classification of the 



dendrochirote holothurians. Breviora, no. 214, pp. 1-7, 1965. 



Rehder, Harald A. A further note on Homalocantha. Hawaiian Shell 

 News, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 2, 1964. 



Rosewater, Joseph. The family Tridacnidae in the Indo-Pacific. 

 Indo-Pacific Mollusca, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 347-396, pis. 263-293, 

 1965. 



Squires, Donald F. Biological results of the Chatham Islands 1954 ex- 

 pedition. Part 6. Scleractinia. New Zealand Dept. Sci. and 

 Industr. Res. Bull., vol. 139, no. 6, 29 pp., 4 pis., 1964. 



. Deep water corals as fish food. Nature, vol. 203, no. 4995, 



pp. 663-664, 1964. 



. Fossil coral thickets in Wairarapa, New Zealand. Journ. 



Paleont., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 904-915, pis. 147-148, 1964. 

 . New stony corals (Scleractinia) from northeastern New Zea- 

 land. Rec. Auckland Inst, and Mus., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1-9, 1 pi., 

 1964. 

 . The Southern Ocean: A potential for coral studies. Ann. 



Rep. Smithsonian Inst., 1963, pp. 447-459, 4 pis., 1964. 



. A new species of Pliobothrus, a hydrocoral, from the Oli- 



gocene of New Zealand. Trans. Roy. Soc. New Zealand (geol.), 

 vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 23-25, pi. 1, 1965. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS ENTOMOLOGY 65 



Squires, Donald F. Neoplasia in a coral? Science, vol. 148, no. 



3669, pp. 503-505, 1965. 

 Stevens, Belle A., and Chace, Fenner A., Jr. The mesopelagic 



caridean shrimp Notostomusjaponicus Bate in the northeastern Pacific. 



Crustaceana, vol. 8, part 3, pp. 277-284, 4 figs., May 1965. 



ENTOMOLOGY 



Throughout the department there has been marked activity in the 

 field and in basic research this year. Paul J. Spangler completed his 

 study of Peruvian water beetles for the Academy of Natural Sciences 

 of Philadelphia. Both larvae and adults were included in this work, 

 which included the description of two new genera and 12 new species, 

 all represented by 129 illustrations. Spangler also continued his 

 studies toward a revision of the important water-beetle genus Tropi- 

 sternas. Members of this Western Hemisphere genus have been shown 

 to be intermediate hosts of several important internal parasites, notably 

 a tapeworm cysticercoid and the thorny-headed worm, both affecting 

 swine in Puerto Rico. Certain species are implicated in the trans- 

 mission of botulism to waterfowl. Other species of Tropisternus are 

 host to many species of fungi being studied by mycologists. One of 

 the most significant of Spangler's accomplishments was his discovery 

 of the snail Planorbina glabrata (Say) — the intermediate host of the 

 principal helminthic diseases of man, schistosomiaisis — on the island of 

 Dominica while he was participating in the Bredin-Archbold-Smith- 

 sonian biological survey of Dominica. 



Oscar L. Gartwright is continuing his research on the scarab-beetle 

 genus Ataenius, which consists of about 300 described species; he spent 

 two months studying types in the British Museum (Natural History) 

 and the Museum d'Histoire naturelle, Paris. 



Research associate Doris H. Blake continued her study of the Chrys- 

 omelidae of the Western Hemisphere. She completed two papers and 

 is presently revising the genus Glyptoscelis. Mrs. Blake devoted five 

 weeks to research at the Science Museum, Institute of Jamaica, and 

 on several field trips there she acquired new material for the national 

 collection. 



Richard C. Froeschner completed a revision of the cactus plant 

 bugs (family Miridae) which makes available names to be used in 

 ecological studies of insects important to the culture and control of 

 cacti. Clarification of the nomenclature of the burrower bugs (Cyd- 

 nidae) was accomplished by the fixation of correct names. 




66 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Research associate Carl J. Drake continued his investigations of the 

 lacebugs (Tingidae) of Madagascar, the Congo, and the Americas, but 

 the publication of his 634-page catalog, Lacebugs of the World, is the 

 most significant contribution to the knowledge of this group of insects that 

 has ever appeared and is the culmination of a lifetime of research and 

 investigation. [Active to the last, Carl J. Drake died October 2, 1965.] 



Donald R. Davis conducted biological investigations of yucca and 

 agave moths, emphasizing differences in life histories, host specificity, 

 and other factors. His published work will be replete with illustrations 

 demonstrating his findings. Davis is also engaged in a study of the 

 New World Incurvariidae, small moths belonging to the superfamily 

 Tineoidea. In April 1965 he joined the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian 

 biological survey of Dominica for field work which will emphasize 

 investigations of the Tineoidea. 



W. Donald Duckworth has made significant progress with his research 

 on the New World Stenomidae. Particularly important in this con- 

 nection have been the field investigations carried on in El Salvador, 

 Costa Rica, and Panama. These investigations have resulted in the 

 accumulation of much material which will contribute to our knowledge 

 of the ecology and zoogeography of the group. Further advances in 

 the research on the Stenomidae were made by his study of the extensive 

 collections of typical and ordinary material at the British Museum 

 (Natural History); also the type material from the Naturhistorisches 

 Museum, Vienna. 



William D. Field continued his research on the butterflies of the 

 genera Thecla and Vanessa and initiated studies of the butterflies and 

 larger moths of Dominica. The latter project will include the moth 

 families Arctiidae, Ctenuchidae, and Sphingidae. 



J. F. Gates Clarke furthered his long-term project of elucidating the 

 Meyrick types of Micro lepidoptera. Volume 5 of this series appeared 

 in March 1965. The solutions to several problems and the revision of 

 several groups of Neotropical Microlepidoptera have been accom- 

 plished. The research on the moths of this area is another long-term 

 project greatly facilitated by a grant from the National Science Founda- 

 tion. Concurrently, Clarke is continuing research on the Micro- 

 lepidoptera of Rapa, Micronesia, and other Pacific Islands. 



Oliver S. Flint, Jr., in his research on the Trichoptera (caddisflies) 

 of the Nearctic and Neotropical regions, has concentrated on those of 

 the West Indies, with the result that major papers on the Trichoptera 

 of Jamaica and the Lesser Antilles are nearly complete. 



Research associate Thomas E. Snyder continued work on the second 

 supplement to his notable "Annotated, Subject-Heading Bibliography 

 of the Termites." 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS ENTOMOLOGY 67 



Research associate K. C. Emerson completed several projects on the 

 taxonomy of the Mallophaga or biting lice. In the course of his 

 investigations he has studied major collections of lice from birds from 

 Uruguay, New Guinea, the Congo, and the Pacific Ocean. 



Ralph E. Crabill, Jr., is continuing several projects, mostly begun 

 several years ago. Among them are a monograph of the New Zealand 

 chilopods, a revision of the genus Strigamia, and a revision of the 

 Mecistocephalidae. He is also preparing several articles on the dolicho- 

 cephalic Geophilomorpha. Work on two projects, a monograph and 

 a checklist of North American Chilopoda, is suspended because of the 

 unavailability of certain type specimens. From May 18 to September 

 8, 1964, Crabill studied critical collections in London, Munich, Vienna, 

 Hamburg, and Frankfurt. In order to augment our material, Crabill 

 undertook several field trips in north, central, and southern Germany 

 and in the Tirol and Vorarlberg areas of Austria. 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 1964 through June 1965 



Blake, Doris H. Twelve new species of chrysomelid beetles from the 

 West Indies (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae). Amer. Mus. Novit., 

 no. 2217, pp. 1-13, 14 figs., March 1965. 



Carriker, M. A., Jr. Mallophaga de Mexico y Centro America 

 (Insecta). Rev. Soc. Mexicana Hist. Nat., vol. 24, pp. 49-67, 

 18 figs., December 1963. 



— . On the genera "Cinconiphilus" and " Ardeiphilus" with descrip- 

 tions of six new species (Mallophaga, Menoponidae). Rev. Brasi- 

 leira Biol., vol. 24, pp. 95-108, 27 figs., June 1964. 



Cartwright, O. L. Lectotype designations and new synonymy in the 

 genus Ataenius (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae). Coleopterists' Bull., 

 vol. 18, pp. 101-104, December 1964. 



Clarke, J. F. Gates. A new genus and species from the Juan Fernan- 

 dez Islands (Lepidoptera: Blastodacnidae). Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash- 

 ington, vol. 77, pp. 125-126, June 1964. 



-. Neotropical Microlepidoptera, VI. Genera Orsotricha Mey- 



rick and Palinorsa Meyrick (Gelechiidae, Oecophoridae). Proc. 

 U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 116, no. 3502, pp. 197-204, 4 figs., 1 pi., 

 November 1964. 



. Catalogue of the type specimens of Microlepidoptera in the 



British Museum (Natural History) described by Edward Meyrick, 

 vol. 5, pp. 1-581, 283 pis., March 1965. 




68 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Grabill, Ralph E., Jr. A revised interpretation of the primitive 



mecistocephalid genus, Arrup, with redescription of its type-species. 



Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 77, pp. 161-170, October 1964. 

 . Untersuchung iiber die Charaktere und Verwandtschaft 



von Turkophilus. Opuscula Zoologica, nr. 76, pp. 1-6, December 



1964. 

 Drake, Carl J. The Australian genus Euaulana Drake (Hemiptera: 



Tingidae). Proc. Roy. Soc. Queensland, vol. 75, pp. 37-38, 



1 fig., October 1964. 



and Catley, A. An unreported gall-producing lacebug in 



New Guinea (Papua) (Hemiptera: Tingidae). Pacific Insects, 

 vol. 6, pp. 229-230, 4 figs., August 1964. 



■ and Herring, Jon L. The genus Nidicola (Hemiptera: Antho- 



coridae). Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 77, pp. 53-64, 5 

 figs., June 1964. 



and Hill, B. G. Some Ethiopian lacebugs (Hemiptera: 



Tingidae). Great Basin Naturalist, vol. 24, pp. 83-92, 3 figs., 

 December 1964. 



and Quadri, M. A new species of lacebug from Pakistan 



(Hemiptera: Tingidae). Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 77, 

 pp. 247-250, 1 fig., December 1964. 



and Ruhoff, Florence A. Genus Plerochila (Hemiptera: 



Heteroptera, family Tingidae). Institut Pares Nat. du Congo 

 et Rwanda, fasc. 44, pp. 101-113, 3 figs., December 1964. 



Lacebugs of the world: a catalog (Hemiptera: Tingidae). 



U.S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 243, pp. 1-634, 57 pis., March 1965. 

 Duckworth, W. D. Neotropical Microlepidoptera, IV. A new genus 



of Stenomidae with descriptions of four new species (Lepidoptera: 



Gelechioidea). Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 116, no. 3497, pp. 



97-114, 8 figs., September 1964. 

 . North American Stenomidae (Lepidoptera: Gelechioidea). 



Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 116, no. 3495, pp. 23-72, October 



1964. 



North American moths of the genus Swammerdamia (Lepi- 



doptera: Yponomeutidae) . Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 116, 

 no. 3507, pp. 549-556, 3 figs., May 1965. 



Emerson, K. C. A new species of Mallophaga from Natal. Ann. 

 Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 13, vol. 6, no. 72, pp. 717-718, 3 figs., Decem- 

 ber 1963. 



. A new species of Mallophaga from the Philippine Islands. 



Journ. Kansas Ent. Soc, vol. 38, pp. 68-69, 4 figs., January 1965. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS BOTANY 69 



Emerson, K. G. The Vernon L. Kellogg Mallophaga type material 



in the Cornell University collection. Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, 



vol. 67, pp. 46-50, April 1965. 

 and Stojanovich, C. J. A new species of Mallophaga from 



the Mikado pheasant. Ent. News, vol. 75, pp. 256-258, 4 figs., 



December 1964. 

 Flint, Oliver S., Jr. The caddisflies (Trichoptera) of Puerto Rico. 



Univ. Puerto Rico Agr. Exp. Sta. Techn. Pap. 40, pp. 1-80, 



19 figs., December 1964. 

 Froeschner, Richard C. Larinocerus balius, a new genus and new 



species of plant bug from the United States (Hemiptera: Miridae). 



Ent. News, vol. 76, pp. 85-89, 1 fig., April 1965. 



BOTANY 



The vast forests, plains, tablelands, and islands of the New World 

 tropics are a reservoir of countless species of plants still to be understood 

 and described. For over 75 years botanists of the U.S. National 

 Herbarium have spent a large share of their research time exploring for 

 plants in these regions and in making them understood to the scientific 

 community through their publications. 



This tradition of specialization in the New World tropics has con- 

 tinued into the present time. During the past year Lyman B. Smith 

 spent six months collecting plants in Santa Catarina and adjoining 

 States of Brazil in preparation for a flora of the former area. This 

 work is being pursued in collaboration with Brazilian botanists Padre 

 Raulino Reitz and Roberto M. Klein of the Herbario "Barbosa 

 Rodrigues," Itajai, Santa Catarina. The grasslands of Brazil's Mato 

 Grosso and other parts of the planalto were explored by Thomas R. 

 Soderstrom in association with his studies on the grasses of Brazil. 

 Soderstrom accompanied botanists of the New York Botanical Garden 

 and first collected plants around Brasilia, an area surprisingly unknown 

 botanically. Later, poorly known parts of the States of Mato Grosso 

 and Goias were visited, including a wide variety of habitats on the 

 Serra do Caiapo which support a rich and varied flora and made for 

 collections of excitingly different plants. Antillean plants were sampled 

 by Dan H. Nicolson, who spent six weeks on Dominica in conjunction 

 with the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian biological survey of that Carib- 

 bean island. 



Keen interest has prompted the Smithsonian Institution to participate 

 actively in an international program for the preparation of a "Flora 

 Neotropica." To this end, research associate Jose Cuatrecasas was 




70 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



appointed by the "Organization for a Flora Neotropica" as one of 

 two scientific directors. For his work with the Organization, the Smith- 

 sonian has given him laboratory and office space to help him carry out 

 his responsibilities. Besides continuing his own investigations of New 

 World plants, Cuatrecasas will act as liaison officer, especially with 

 Latin American botanists, to stimulate research clarifying the taxonomic 

 complexities occurring in the Western Hemisphere tropics. Production 

 of a tropical flora for the New World is a Herculean undertaking 

 because of the great number of species, the shortage of sufficiently 

 trained botanists, and the still difficult access to many outlying regions. 

 It will be the labor of generations of botanists; the present hope is to 

 lay a sound foundation for the research of years to come. 



A smaller, but nonetheless significant, project also begun this year 

 is the production of a flora for the Island of Dominica. Actually, this 

 island falls within the range of the "Flora Neotropica," of which the 

 information set forth will form a fragment. The scientific aspects of 

 this venture are under the direction of Dan H. Nicolson, who is being 

 aided by fellow Smithsonian scientists as well as those from other 

 botanical institutions in the United States and abroad. 



Mason E. Hale, Jr., carried his research on the cosmopolitan lichen 

 genus Parmelia to the Far East this past year under the auspices of the 

 National Science Foundation and the Government of Japan. He made 

 extensive general collections of lichens in Hawaii, Sabah, Sarawak, the 

 Philippines, and Japan; and through his work the Museum will have 

 the world's most extensive Malaysian and Philippine lichen collections. 

 Hale was based at the National Science Museum in Tokyo for the 

 greater part of his studies abroad, collaborating there with Syo 

 Kurokawa. 



As the facts accumulated by intensive study of plants become over- 

 powering in their numbers and increasingly more difficult to consult, 

 it becomes evident that means must be found for the rapid storage and 

 retrieval of these data so that they can conveniently be used for further 

 investigations. Presently, searches for data are subject to the vagaries 

 of abstracting and indexing journals and to human shortcomings, and 

 therefore a large body of pertinent data relative to current research 

 projects might easily be overlooked. Machine storing of data does not 

 automatically confer accuracy or reliability, since the system is only as 

 good as the confirmed data stored in it; but the data are always re- 

 trievable in their entirety, and automatic data processing, moreover, 

 provides ways objectively to manipulate facts in a manner not pre- 

 viously possible. 



Botanists are realizing that data processing devices and computers 

 may be important tools in the treatment of botanical facts; thus, David 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS BOTANY 71 



B. Lellinger has completed research on the generic relationships of the 

 fern subfamily Adiantoideae, a taxon of 45 genera. The study was 

 the first of its kind to use a large digital computer to apply neo-typologi- 

 cal methods to evolutionary classification. The computer employed 

 models of character-state distributions, and chose those characters which 

 were most probably important to an evolutionary classification of the 

 taxa in Adiantoideae. Machine-made computations enabled Lellinger 

 to construct dendrograms illustrating the most probable evolution of 

 the genera. Among the resultant taxonomic conclusions which he 

 drew were the division of the subfamily into six tribes and the segrega- 

 tion of several genera. These separations were made on the basis of 

 probability, rather than intuition. The computer proved to be a val- 

 uable adjunct to, but not a replacement for, conventional taxonomic 

 methods. 



In taxonomic studies it is important to consider all evidence which 

 may assist in elucidating problems in plant classification and evolution 

 and to be concerned with all parts of the plant body, with the influence 

 of environment, and with pertinent chemical processes. Accordingly, 

 it is noteworthy that Richard H. Eyde is continuing his investigations 

 into the anatomy and morphology of the genus Corokia which has been 

 allied to the Cornaceae in most taxonomic treatments. Eyde's data, 

 based partially on specimens of Corokia gathered by Smithsonian ento- 

 mologist J. F. Gates Clarke from the remote South Pacific island of 

 Rapa, permit the confident exclusion of the genus from Cornaceae. 



Research on the cytology and pollen morphology of Campanula ameri- 

 cana has been completed by Stanwyn G. Shetler. He is preparing a 

 paper in collaboration with James Matthews of the University of North 

 Carolina on the taxonomic affinities of this species within the genus 

 Campanula. Along a similar vein, Wallace R. Ernst began a cytotax- 

 onomic survey of selected West Indian plants. This will be the first 

 study of its kind on many of these tropical plants. Although associated 

 studies such as those described above may never completely replace 

 traditional morphological taxonomic research, they provide new win- 

 dows through which plant systematics can be viewed, and they present 

 other methods of approach to taxonomic problems. 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 7964 through June 7965 



Ayensu, Edward S., and Stern, William L. Systematic anatomy and 

 ontogeny of the stem in Passifloraceae. Contr. U.S. Nat. Herb., 

 vol. 34, part 3, pp. 45-73, August 1964. 




72 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Conger, Paul S. A new species of marine pennate diatom from Hono- 

 lulu Harbor. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 146, no. 7, pp. 1-5, 

 10 figs., October 1964. 



Cuatregasas, Jose. Cacao and its allies — a taxonomic revision of the 

 genus Theobroma. Contr. U.S. Nat. Herb., vol. 35, part 6, pp. 379- 

 614, 11 maps, 12 pis., 44 figs., August 1964. 



. Miscelanea sobre flora neotropica I. Ciencia (Mexico), 



vol. 23, pp. 137-151, 4 figs., October 1964. 



Studies on Andean Compositae VI. Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash- 



ington, vol. 77, pp. 127-158, 8 figs., October 1964. 



Theobroma. In A. Robyns, Sterculiaceae, Flora of Panama. 



Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard., vol. 51, pp. 89-97, November 1964. 

 Culberson, William L., and Hale, Mason E., Jr. Pyxine caesio- 



pruinosa in the United States. Bryologist, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 113- 



116, 1965. 

 Ernst, Wallace R. The genus Eschscholzia in the South Coast Ranges 



of California. Madrono, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 281-294, 4 figs., 



October 1964. 

 Eusebio, Mario A., and Stern, William L. Preservation of herbarium 



specimens in the humid tropics. Philippine Agriculturist, vol. 48, 



pp. 16-20, 1964. 

 Eyde, Richard H. Inferior ovary and generic affinities of Garrya. 



Amer. Journ. Bot., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1083-1092, November- 

 December 1964. 

 Hale, Mason E., Jr. The Parmelia conspersa group in North America 



and Europe. Bryologist, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 462-473, 1964. 

 . A monograph of Parmelia subgenus Amphigymnia. Contr. 



U.S. Nat. Herb., vol. 36, part 5, pp. 193-358, April 1965. 



and Kurokawa, Syo. Studies on Parmelia subgenus Parmelia. 



Contr. U.S. Nat. Herb., vol. 36, part 4, pp. 121-191, August 1964. 

 Leonard, E. C, and Smith, Lyman B. Sanchezia and related American 



Acanthaceae. Rhodora, vol. 66, no. 768, pp. 313-343, 5 figs., 



January 1965. 

 Morton, C. V. The nomenclature of a Madagascarian Platycerium. 



Baileya, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 36-38, June 1964. 

 ■ . New combinations in Lycopodium. Amer. Fern Journ., vol. 



54, no. 2, pp. 71-73, June 1964. 



A new Jamaican Cyathea. Amer. Fern Journ., vol. 55, no. 1, 



pp. 30-32, March 1965. 

 Nicolson, Dan H. Proposal to conserve the generic name Montri- 

 chardia Criiger (1854) against Pleurospa Rafinesque (1838). Regn. 

 Veg., vol. 34, p. 55, 1964. 






The scrubby vegetation of the Brazilian planalto provides a variety of plant 

 species new to science. Top left: A native collector gathers material of a 

 leguminous shrub for preservation. Right: Members of a Smithsonian-New 

 York Botanical Garden expedition arrange newly collected plants in papers 

 prior to drying. Below: An important step in successful plant collecting 

 in the humid tropics is the prevention of specimen deterioration through 

 rapid drying. Plant presses are filled and arranged over drying racks, 

 heated by gasoline stoves placed under them. Hot air passing through the 

 presses carries off the moisture of the succulent plant parts. (See p. 69.) 




Modern stacks of fireproof and pest- 

 proof cabinets are used at the Lamont 

 Street quarters of the department of 

 entomology. Below: Fragile speci- 

 mens are restored by introducing a 

 relaxing agent into the vial. Tri- 

 sodium phosphate is used on such 

 arthropods as ticks, millipedes, and 

 spiders. (See p. 89.) 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS BOTANY 73 



. Collecting Araceae. Regn. Veg., vol. 39, pp. 123-126, 1965. 



Robinson, Harold E. A small collection of bryophytes from upper 



Assam, India. Journ. Hattori Bot. Lab., no. 27, pp. 124-130, 1964. 

 . A synopsis of the Dolichopodidae (Diptera) of the south- 

 eastern United States and adjacent regions. Misc. Publ. Ent. Soc. 



Amer., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 103-192, 1964. 

 . Two new genera of Dolichopodidae from Mexico (Diptera). 



Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 245-252, 1964. 

 . New taxa and new records of bryophytes from Mexico and 



Central America. Bryologist, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 446-458, 1964. 

 . Notes on Leucobryaceae in Central America. Bryologist, 



vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 89-93, 1965. 

 — . A new species of Plagiochila from Venezuela. Bryologist, 



vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 93-94, 1965. 



Discopygiella, a new genus of Dolichopodidae from Mexico 



(Diptera). Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 51-55, 



1965. 

 and Hermann, Frederick J. Notes on American Grimmias. 



Bryologist, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 170-174, 1964. 

 Rudd, Velva E. Nomenclatural problems in the Acacia cornigera 



complex. Madrono, vol. 17, pp. 198-201, April 1964. 

 Shetler, Stanwyn G. Plants in the arctic-alpine environment. 



Ann. Rep. Smithsonian Inst, 1963, pp. 473-497, 12 pis., 1964. 

 •. Komarov Botanical Institute, Leningrad. Plant Sci. Bull., 



vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-3, April 1965. 

 Smith, Lyman B. Bromeliadata of the month, no. 8: Abromeitiella. 



Bromeliana (Greater New York Chapt. Bromel. Soc), vol. 1, no. 8, 



pp. 2-4, 1 fig., June 1964. 

 ■. Bromeliaceas nuevas o criticas del Peru — I. Publ. Mus. 



Hist. Nat. "Javier Prado," ser. B (Bot.), no. 16, pp. 1-6, 11 figs., 



1964. 

 . Notes on Bromeliaceae, XXII. Phytologia, vol. 10, no. 6, 



pp. 454-488, 2 pis., October 1964. 

 ■. Vriesea marnier-lapostollci. Bromel. Soc. Bull., vol. 14, no. 6, 



pp. 108 and 109, 2 figs., 1964. 

 . Letter. Bromeliana (Greater New York Chapt. Bromel. 



Soc), vol. 1, no 11, pp. 2-5, 10 figs., December 1964. 



. Letter. Bromeliana (Greater New York Chapt. Bromel. 



Soc), vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 26-29, 16 figs., May 1965. 

 . Restoration of two Domingan Tillandsias. Bromel. Soc. 



Bull., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3, 4, 2 figs., 1965. 




74 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



and Downs, Robert J. Notes on the Solanaceae of southern 



Brazil. Phytologia, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 422-453, 12 pis., October 

 1964. 



and Downs, Robert J. Kleinodendron, novo genero de 



euforbiareas. Sellowia, no. 16, pp. 175-1 78, 1 fig., December 1964. 



and Schubert, Bernice G. Nuevas especies peruanas de la 



familia Begoniaceae. Publ. Mus. Hist. Nat. "Javier Prado," ser. 



B (Bot.), no. 17, pp. 1-11, 4 pis., 1964. 

 Soderstrom, Thomas R., and Decker, Henry F. Reederochloa, a 



new genus of dioecious grasses from Mexico. Brittonia, vol. 16, 



no. 3, pp. 334-339, 13 figs., July 1964. 

 Stern, William L., and Zamuco, Isidro T. Identity of "tiaong" 



(Dipterocarpaceae) . Brittonia, vol. 17, pp. 35-46, January 1965. 

 Swallen, Jason R. Species of Ichnanthus in South America related to 



I. ichnodes (Griseb.) Hitchc. & Chase. Phytologia, vol. 11, no. 2, 



pp. 73-80, December 1964. 

 . New South American Ichnanthus. Phytologia, vol. 11, no. 3, 



pp. 145-151, December 1964. 

 . Two new genera of Olyreae from South America. Phyto- 



logia, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 152-154, December 1964. 



and Tovar, Oscar. The grass genus Dissanthelium. Phyto- 



logia, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 361-376, March 1965. 

 Wurdack, John J. Melastomataceas novas do Estado do Parana. 



Papeis Avulsos Herbario Hatschbach, no. 4, 3 pp. (unnumbered), 



1 fig., December 1963. 

 . Melastomataceas nuevas Venezolanas. Bol. Soc. Vene- 



zolana Cienc. Nat., vol. 25, no. 107, pp. 211-216, 1 fig., June 1964. 

 . Botanical exploration of the Marafion rainforests. Gard. 



Journ. New York Bot. Gard., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 143-146, 8 figs., 



July-August 1964. 

 . A Peruvian bromeliad trove. Bromel. Soc. Bull., vol. 14, 



no. 6, pp. 110-116, 7 figs., November-December 1964. 



. Certamen Melastomataceis IX. Phytologia, vol. 11, no. 6, 



pp. 377-400, March 1965. 



PALEOBIOLOGY 



Continuing his studies of the Permian Brachiopoda of West Texas, 

 G. Arthur Cooper, in collaboration with Richard E. Grant of the U.S. 

 Geological Survey, completed a manuscript of 4000 pages. The illus- 

 trations are yet to be made. With J. T. Dutro of the U.S. Geological 

 Survey, Cooper spent a month in New Mexico completing a study of 

 the stratigraphy of the Devonian of that State. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — PALEOBIOLOGY 75 



Investigation of the Lower Devonian fossil flora of eastern Canada by 

 Francis M. Hueber is demonstrating that this is a more diversified flora 

 than previously anticipated. Hueber visited nine European museums 

 and universities to obtain data, for comparison with the Canadian flora, 

 from their collections of Devonian plants from classic European local- 

 ities. He observed a striking similarity of occurrence and composition 

 between the western European and Canadian floras. His paper "New 

 data on the morphology of Devonian Psilopsida and Lycopsida," em- 

 bodying much of the new information gained from his studies of the 

 Canadian Lower Devonian flora, was presented at the Symposium on 

 Earliest Records of Plant Life, during the Tenth International Botanical 

 Congress at Edinburgh, Scotland. 



Walter H. Adey extended his studies of crustose coralline algae 

 northward from the Gulf of Maine along the coasts of Nova Scotia, the 

 Gulf of St. Lawrence, to Newfoundland and Labrador. His northern- 

 most station was at latitude 60°6'N. A collection of 3010 specimens 

 was assembled. Preparation and examination proceeded as the col- 

 lecting schedule progressed during summer, and was completed during 

 winter and spring with the help of museum aide Mary Cochran. 

 Through a rare opportunity, the sexual development of a species of the 

 coralline Lithothamnium was recorded and worked out. Work has pro- 

 ceeded in plotting of the bathymetric and geographic distribution of the 

 crustose coralline species in the regions where collections were obtained. 



C. Lewis Gazin is investigating the morphology of the Eocene con- 

 dylarthran mammal Hyopsodus. He completed a study of a "fossil 

 brain" of the middle Eocene primate Smilodectes, the first well-preserved 

 endocranial cast of a Tertiary primate reported from this country. He 

 also completed a study of a series of early Eocene mammalian faunas 

 and their environments in the vicinity of the Rock Springs uplift. 



Field work last summer by Gazin and Franklin L. Pearce of the 

 laboratory of vertebrate paleontology yielded rare Paleocene mammals 

 from the Puerco and Torrejon horizons of the San Juan Basin in New 

 Mexico, and early Eocene and Oligocene mammals from the Wind 

 River Basin in central Wyoming. 



David H. Dunkle continued studies of new and poorly known fossil 

 fishes from Middle and Upper Devonian strata of Ohio, Ontario, and 

 Michigan. Accompanied by museum technician Gladwyn B. Sullivan, 

 he made a second trip to Tijeras, Bernalillo County, N. Mex., where 

 in 1963 a unique assemblage of marine fishes was discovered in the 

 Late Paleozoic Madera Formation. There, two types of sharks, a 

 paleoniscoid, an osteolepid, and a probable lungfish were collected. 



Nicholas Hotton III, starting in September 1963, spent a year in a 

 field study of the stratigraphy and environment of the Permo-Triassic 




76 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Beaufort Series of South Africa, 10,000 feet thick. Preliminary study- 

 indicates more overlap between supposedly distinct faunal zones than 

 hitherto suspected, and suggests that some of the lower zones may rep- 

 resent contemporaneous environmental facies rather than temporal 

 sequences. 



A collection of the abundant mammal-like reptile fauna of the Beau- 

 fort was also made, with emphasis on the herbivorous suborder Anomo- 

 dontia. Knowledge of the anomodonts is vital to understanding of 

 Beaufort stratigraphy and paleoecology because of their abundance 

 and variety and because of their basic position in the food pyramid of 

 Permo-Triassic times. 



Publication of Clayton E. Ray's research on later Cenozoic mammals 

 included three papers on Antillean faunas. A survey of fossil walruses 

 of the eastern states is in progress. 



With museum specialist John E. Ott, Ray spent two weeks in Florida 

 collecting a partial skeleton of a mammoth discovered by a Boy Scout 

 troop. The specimen was donated to the Institution by Explorer Post 

 410 of Wauchula, Fla. Ray is also studying Pleistocene musk oxen 

 referred to him by Virginia Polytechnic Institute. 



Research associate Remington Kellogg continued investigating the 

 developmental history of the Cetacea with special reference to the 

 Mysticeti. A study of a Calvert Miocene sirenian was completed. 



Richard S. Boardman and research associate John Utgaard completed 

 a major restudy of some genera of Paleozoic Bryozoa. Their paper 

 includes an interpretative section on the budding of most incrusting 

 forms, illustrated by 3-dimensional cutaway drawings by scientific 

 illustrator Lawrence B. Isham. Boardman has begun an investigation 

 of living species of cyclostome Bryozoa considered closely related to 

 Paleozoic forms. Microstructure of the calcareous walls of individuals 

 in the colonies is being studied jointly with Kenneth M. Towe, using 

 the electron microscope. 



In other research on Bryozoa, museum specialist Frederick J. Collier 

 finished a detailed taxonomic study of two Devonian genera that will 

 be the nucleus for a larger publication on rhomboporoid genera. 



Richard H. Benson, professor of geology at the University of Kansas, 

 joined the staff in July 1964 to work on Recent and fossil ostracodes. 

 He spent his first five months in the western Indian Ocean as a member 

 of the scientific party on the R/V Anton Bruun. He collected thousands 

 of specimens off Africa and Madagascar and has begun to sort and de- 

 scribe them. Benson is also completing a survey of the effects of the 

 formation of Bering Strait on the ostracodes of the North Pacific and 

 Arctic Oceans. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS PALEOBIOLOGY 77 



Martin A. Buzas completed a manuscript on a multivariate analysis 

 of some species of Elphidium. He is currently applying the same ca- 

 nonical analysis to the distribution and abundance of Foraminifera off 

 Texas. In addition, he has been surveying the Foraminifera in Chesa- 

 peake Bay as part of a preliminary sampling program which will be 

 followed by an ecological study of the Foraminifera in the Bay. In 

 cooperation with the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole, 

 Mass., Buzas has also been studying the distribution and abundance of 

 Foraminifera in Hadley Harbor, Mass. 



Richard Cifelli continues his studies of planktonic Foraminifera from 

 the north and equatorial Atlantic in a cooperative program with the 

 Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution that includes the detailed sur- 

 vey and sampling of portions of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Last year 

 the R/V Chain surveyed around latitude 22° N., and many cores, 

 bottom samples, and dredges were collected from the crest and flank 

 of the Ridge. Several samples yielded chunks of cemented foraminif- 

 eral oozes associated with basalt and basaltic weathering products. 

 The oozes are all late Tertiary, but represent at least two and possibly 

 three distinct ages. From the relationships between the oozes and the 

 basalts, it appears that the latter were deposited during the late Miocene 

 or early Pliocene. 



Erie G. Kauffman continues to study the Mesozoic pelecypod groups 

 Inoceramidae, Ostreidae, and Thyasira. A morphologic and supra- 

 specific taxonomic revision of the Inoceramidae and a study of the 

 Caribbean Cretaceous inoceramids were completed. Significant prog- 

 ress was made on study of the Upper Cretaceous Inoceramidae of 

 North America. A study of American Cretaceous Thyasira and three 

 studies dealing with the Ostreidae are completed or in progress. Work 

 was initiated on a major revision of early Upper Cretaceous stratigraphy 

 in Colorado and Kansas, and several local biostratigraphic studies in 

 Colorado and New Mexico are in progress. Kauffman was in the field 

 for three months' work on Cretaceous paleontology and stratigraphy of 

 the Rocky Mountains, and he conducted two weeks of research in 

 Trinidad. 



In an effort to understand the living habits of fossil echinoids, Porter 

 M. Kier three years ago started a study of the echinoids living off the 

 Florida Keys. Using scuba gear, he and Richard E. Grant of the U.S. 

 Geological Survey mapped the distribution of 17 species found between 

 the shore and a depth of 1 10 feet seaward of the reef. Particular atten- 

 tion was paid to the relationship of the echinoids to the bottom, vegeta- 

 tion, depth, and nearness to shore. Most species were restricted to a 




78 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



narrow depth range and to a particular type of bottom. The species 

 living on sand were only rarely found on rock or coral. 



Kenneth M. Towe, who joined the staff on October 1, 1964, is in 

 process of setting up a laboratory for research with the electron micro- 

 scope. His principal interests include calcification and shell structure, 

 and clay and colloid mineralogy. 



Research associate Wendell P. Woodring spent two months in Central 

 America collecting Tertiary mollusks for a continued study of the 

 paleontology and stratigraphy of Panama, Costa Rica, and adjacent 

 areas. He is currently in the field collecting faunas from the classical 

 Tertiary localities of Italy and France. Research associate Franco 

 Rasetti completed one phase of study on a new Lower Cambrian tri- 

 lobite fauna from the Taconic region of New York. And research 

 associate Axel A. Olsson continues his studies of South American 

 Tertiary Mollusca. 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 1964 through June 1965 



Adey, Walter H. The genus Phymatolithon in the Gulf of Maine. 



Hydrobiologia, vol. 24, nos. 1-3, pp. 377-420, September 1964. 

 Benson, Richard H. Recent cytheracean ostracodes from McMurdo 



Sound and the Ross Sea, Antarctica. Univ. Kansas Paleont. 



Contr., art. 6, pp. 1-36, pis. 1-4, figs. 1-25, 1964. 

 . Photography of microfossils. In Handbook of paleontological 



techniques, eds. B. Kummel and D. Raup, sect. F, pp. 433-446, 



1965. 

 . Recent podocopid and platycopid ostracodes of the Pacific. 



In Ostracods as ecological and paleoecological indicators. Publ. 



Staz. Zool. Napoli, suppl. 33, 40 pp., 1965. 

 and Maddocks, R. F. Recent ostracodes of Knysha estuary, 



Cape Province, Union of South Africa. Univ. Kansas Paleont. 



Contr., art. 5, pp.1-39, pis. 1-6, figs. 1-22, 1964. 



and Tatro, J. O. Faunal description of Ostracoda of the 



Marlbrook Marl (Campanian), Arkansas. Univ. Kansas Paleont. 



Contr., art. 7, pp. 1-32, pis. 1-6, figs. 1-15, 1964. 

 Boardman, Richard S., and Utgaard, John. Modifications of study 



methods for Paleozoic Bryozoa. Journ. Paleont., vol. 38, no. 4, 



pp. 768-770, 1964. 

 Buzas, Martin A. Foraminifera from late Pleistocene clay near 



Waterville, Maine. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 145, no. 8, 



30 pp., 5 pis., 1965. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS PALEOBIOLOGY 79 



Cifelli, Richard. Planktonic Foraminifera from the western North 



Atlantic. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 148, no. 4, 36 pp., 9 pis., 



1965. 

 , Sachs, K. N., Jr., and Bowen, V. T. Ignition to concen- 

 trate shelled organisms in plankton samples. Deep-Sea Res., vol. 



11, pp. 621-622, 1964. 

 Cooper, G. Arthur, and Grant, Richard E. New Permian strat- 



igraphic units in Glass Mountains, West Texas. Amer. Assoc. 



Petrol. Geol. Bull., vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 1581-1588, 2 figs., September 



1964. 

 Dunkle, David H. Preliminary description of a paleoniscoid fish from 



the Upper Devonian of Ohio. Scient. Publ. Cleveland Mus. 



Nat. Hist., n.s., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-16, 3 pis., 5 figs., October 1964. 

 . The presumed holocephalan fish Pseadodontichthys whitei 



Skeels. Scient. Publ. Cleveland Mus. Nat. Hist., n.s., vol. 3, 



no. 3, pp. 1-10, 1 pi., 2 figs., May 1965. 

 Gazin, C. Lewis. A study of the early Tertiary condylarthran mammal 



Meniscotherium. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 149, no. 2, 98 pp. 



11 pis., 9 figs., 1965. 

 Hooijer, D. A., and Ray, Clayton E. A metapodial of Acratocnus 



(Edentata: Megalonychidae) from a cave in Hispaniola. Proc. 



Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 77, pp. 253-258, December 1964. 

 Hotton, Nicholas, III. Tetrapods. In: Handbook of paleontological 



techniques, eds. B. Kummel and D. Raup, 1965. 

 Hueber, Francis M. The Psilophytes and their relationship to the 



origin of ferns. Mem. Torrey Bot. Club, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 5-9, 



November 1964. 

 Johnson, J. H., and Adey, Walter H. Studies of Lithophyllum and 



related algal genera. Quart. Colorado Sch. Mines, vol. 60, no. 2, 



97 pp., 21 pis., April 1965. 

 Kauffman, Erle G. Costellacesta, a new subgenus of Lima from the 



Cretaceous of the Gulf and Atlantic Coast Province. Tulane 



Stud. Geol., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 89-101, 1 pi., 3 figs., 1964. 

 . The Upper Cretaceous Inoceramus of Puerto Rico (published 



abstract and 30-page mimeographed copy of manuscript). Abstr. 



4th Caribbean Geol. Conf., Trinidad, p. 1, 1965. 

 . Collecting in concretions, nodules, and septaria. Handb. 



Paleont. Techn., sect. A, pp. 175-184, 1965. 

 Kier, Porter M. Fossil echinoids from the Marshall Islands, U.S. 

 Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap. 260-GG, pp. 1121-1127, pi. 32, figs. 328- 

 331, 1964. 




80 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



, Grant, Richard E., and Yochelson, Ellis L. Whitening 



fossils. Handb. Paleont. Techn., sect. F., pp. 453-456, 1965. 

 McAlester, A. L.; Speden, I. G.; and Buz as, Martin A. Ecology of 



Pleistocene molluscs from Martha's Vineyard — A reconsideration. 



Journ. Paleont., vol. 38, pp. 985-991, 1964. 

 Rasetti, Franco. New Lower Cambrian trilobite faunas of north- 

 eastern Tennessee. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 148, no. 3, 127 



pp., 21 pi., 1965. 

 Ray, Clayton E. A small assemblage of vertebrate fossils from Spring 



Bay, Barbados. Journ. Barbados Mus. and Hist. Soc, vol. 31, 



no. 1, pp. 11-22, November 1964. 

 . The relationships of Quemisia gravis (Rodentia: ?Heptaxo- 



dontidae). Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 149, no. 3, 12 pp., 



1 pi., April 1965. 



and Lipps, Lewis. An assemblage of Pleistocene vertebrates 



and mollusks from Bartow County, Georgia (abstr.). Bull. Georgia 

 Acad. Sci., vol. 23, no. 2, p. 67, April 1965. 

 Sohl, Norman F., and Kauffman, Erle G. Giant Upper Cretaceous 

 oysters from the Gulf coast and Caribbean. U.S. Geol. Surv. 

 Prof. Pap. 483-H, 22 pp., 5 pis., 3 figs., 1964. 



MINERAL SCIENCES 



The department of mineral sciences completed its first full year as 

 a separate department on October 15, 1964. Kurt Fredriksson joined 

 the staff in July 1 964 to head the division of meteorites and to implement 

 a research program supported by the National Aeronautics and Space 

 Administration. Later in the year Brian Mason joined the meteorite 

 group, and in August 1964 William G. Melson joined the staff to head 

 the division of petrology. 



The division of meteorites now operates a modern and complete elec- 

 tron microprobe laboratory. Emission and x-ray fluorescence spec- 

 troscopy and x-ray diffraction facilities have also been added. The 

 optical microscopy and photographic equipment has been upgraded 

 and extended. The chemical laboratory has obtained modernized 

 equipment for sample preparation and spectrophotometry. 



The electron microprobe is an instrument for nondestructive ele- 

 mental analysis of extremely small (~ 1 micron) particles of material 

 or areas. In operation, a polished sample, such as a petrographic thin 

 section, is bombarded with a finely focused electron beam. The 

 elements present in the sample then emit their characteristic x-ray 




Electron probe x-ray microanalyzer in the division of mete- 

 orites. To the right are high-voltage and electron-lens 

 power supplies and vacuum controls. The main tank has the 

 electron gun (top), a microscope, sample chamber with 

 access door and sample stage, and three spectrometers. To 

 the left of the operator are beam-scanning controls and display 

 oscilloscopes with camera. The recording unit at the left 

 contains detector and control-voltage supplies, strip-chart 

 recorders, and x-ray counting devices (scalers) connected to 

 the automatic typewriter (far left). The instrument was 

 obtained under a grant (NsG- 688) from the National Aero- 

 nautics and Space Administration for meteorite research 

 now in progress. (See p. 80-81.) 




Uncut diamond crystal of extraordinary size (253.7 carats) and unusually 

 perfect form was taken from the Dutoitspan mine, near Kimberley, South 

 Africa. Given by Harry Winston, Inc., in memory of Sir Ernest Oppen- 

 heimer, Chairman of the Board of De Beers Consolidated Mines, Ltd., 

 from 1929 until his death in 1957. (See p. 97.) 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — MINERAL SCIENCES 81 



spectra that are analyzed with three focusing spectrometers, and the 

 elements determined. Quantitative analysis is obtained by comparing 

 the intensity of a specific spectral line emitted by the sample to a 

 standard of known composition. The sensitivity of the method is 

 usually better than 0.1 percent, and since the sample weight can be of 

 the order of 10~ 12 grams, it may be possible to detect 10~ 15 grams of an 

 element. The electron beam can be made to sweep the area of the 

 sample synchronously with an oscilloscope on which the light intensity 

 is modified by the x-rays emitted from the sample. By means of 

 this technique a "map" can be obtained illustrating semiquantita- 

 tively the distribution of all elements heavier than lithium in areas 

 from about 10 x 10 to 500 x 500 microns. 



The acquisition of an x-ray diffraction unit, used for identifying and 

 estimating abundances of different phases in meteorites, has filled a 

 long-time deficiency in the department's facilities. Also acquired was 

 an x-ray fluorescence unit which attaches to the diffractometer. This 

 is used for routine survey analyses of meteorites and rocks before 

 deciding if more costly wet-chemical analysis is warranted. Newly 

 acquired emission spectrographic equipment makes it possible to 

 perform semiquantitative spectrographic analyses, particularly for the 

 first survey of an unknown sample when only a small amount, a 

 milligram or less, is available. 



Although the new laboratory has been operating for only six months, 

 an intensive program of meteorite research has been pursued, the 

 scope and variety of which is indicated by the publications that have 

 ensued. 



Edward P. Henderson and Brian Mason collected tektites and 

 meteorites in the interior of Australia for approximately six weeks. 

 A number of fine specimens, including one unique form, were found, 

 and the material is presently being studied in detail as to morphology 

 and material loss during the flight through the atmosphere. This 

 work is being carried out in cooperation with scientists from the NASA 

 Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif. Significant evidence for 

 the fall of tektites in defined "streaks" was obtained. 



Henderson's study of hexahedrites shows that the world-wide dis- 

 tribution is suggestive of showers rather than individual falls. 



Mason published a fundamental study of the distribution of plagi- 

 oclase in chondrites. The presence or absence of this mineral is related 

 to the olivine composition and the type of pyroxene present. From 

 these observations it was concluded that most chondrites have under- 

 gone solid-state recrystallization and that the amount of plagioclase and 

 orthopyroxene may be a measure of the intensity of this metamorphism. 



789-127—66 13 




82 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



With H. B. Wiik, Mason published new descriptions of four meteorites, 

 and he was also coauthor of a paper describing a peculiar new 

 mineral "sinoite," silico oxynitride (Si 2 N 2 0), found in several enstatite 

 chondrites. 



Another new mineral was described by Fredriksson and Henderson 

 (1965). It was first found in enstatite chondrites but is also present in 

 a stony-iron (Mount Egerton) and an iron meteorite (Horse Creek). 

 The findings indicate a close relationship between these different classes 

 of meteorites. Together with K. Keil of the Ames Research Center, 

 Fredriksson published a microprobe analysis of olivine and pyroxene 

 of 90 chondrites, and also a detailed study of the Murray carbonaceous 

 chondrite. These data, as well as the discovery of glass enclosing 

 metallic nickel-iron in the Chainpur chondrite by Fredriksson and 

 Reid, make it possible to set rather rigid boundary conditions for the 

 formation of chondrules and chondrites. There is exceedingly strong 

 evidence for the supposition that chondrules are quenched droplets and 

 that the nickel-iron in chondrites is cogenetic with the main part of 

 the silicates olivine and pyroxene. . 



From an investigation of the mineral phases in the Orgueil carbona- 

 ceous meteorite and their equilibrium relations, completed by Fredriks- 

 son and Kurt Bostrom, University of California, San Diego, it could be 

 shown that the minerals in Orgueil are not in equilibrium but represent 

 at least three different temperature stages. The last formed minerals 

 indicate the presence of an external source of oxidation, possibly water 

 dissociated by ultraviolet radiation. 



E. Olsen and Fredriksson described iron phosphates from iron 

 meteorites. Thermodynamic calculations of the system metallic iron, 

 iron phosphide, and iron phosphate indicate that the degree of oxida- 

 tion of fine octahedrites is approximately the same as in ordinary 

 chondrites and considerably higher than in enstatite chondrites. 



Roy S. Clarke, Jr., completed analyses of two iron meteorites, Bogou 

 and Angelica, and one stony meteorite, Harleton. Eugene Jarosewich 

 analyzed the Bonita Springs chondrite and is working on two of the 

 unequilibrated chondrites, Semarkona and Sharps. An investigation 

 of the distribution of gallium and germanium in iron meteorites and 

 stony-irons is in progress. Tektite studies, particularly relating to the 

 Martha's Vineyard and Georgia tektites, are continuing. Clarke is 

 working on this project cooperatively with colleagues at the Corning 

 Glass Works and the U.S. Geological Survey. He also continues 

 cooperative work with Rutherford J. Gettens of the Freer Gallery on 

 iron-oxide corrosion products associated with antique bronze objects. 

 Paul Ramdohr, professor emeritus, University of Heidelberg, and 

 temporarily on the staff of the Geophysical Laboratory, made micro- 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS MINERAL SCIENCES 83 



scopical investigations of a large number of polished sections of 

 meteorites. 



In the division of mineralogy, George S. Switzer worked on a group 

 of rare ammonium-sulfate minerals, and on a description of one of these, 

 letovicite, from the Geysers, Sonoma County, Calif. He found that 

 published composition of letovicite is given correctly as (NH 4 ) 3 H(S04)2, 

 but that the crystallo graphic data for letovicite given in standard 

 reference works are for the artificial compound NH 4 HS0 4 , not known 

 as a mineral. Work on this poorly described group of minerals is 

 continuing. 



In spring of 1965 Switzer spent several weeks in South Africa visiting 

 diamond mines. Of particular interest were the "pipe" mines where 

 diamonds are found in their original matrix of the ultramafic rock 

 kimberlite. Collections were made of kimberlite from several mines in 

 the Republic of South Africa and in Tanzania, and of the eclogite 

 inclusions in these pipes. A detailed mineralogical study of these 

 collections has been started, an extension of work done some time ago 

 on similar rocks occurring in California. A closely related long-range 

 study underway is the composition of garnet from rocks of all types, 

 and in particular from eclogite, as a first phase of the study. 



Paul E. Desautels continued work on a suite of radioactive minerals 

 from a new occurrence in Mexico. John S. White, Jr., continued work 

 on a first description of the crystallography of natural crystals of platt- 

 nerite. During the year Desautels and White spent two weeks in 

 Oaxaca, Mexico, examining an area of pegmatites containing an in- 

 teresting suite of minerals, including scapolite crystals of very large 

 (up to two feet) size. 



The origin of the ocean basins is a subject of speculation largely 

 because very little is known concerning the rocks which compose them. 

 The geologic contrast between the igneous and metamorphic rocks of 

 the continents and ocean basins is only poorly known. Rocks obtained 

 during recent deep-sea dredgings have demonstrated particularly that 

 important modifications are required in current theories about the 

 origin of the ocean basins and about processes of rock formation be- 

 neath the sea floor. 



During the past year in the division of petrology W. G. Melson began 

 a cooperative study with Vaughan T. Bowen and Tjeerd van Andel of 

 the Woods Hole and Scripps Oceanographic Institutions, respectively, 

 concerning rocks from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. This study, which 

 began when Melson visited Woods Hole in March, resulted in the 

 discovery of metabasalts in the Mid- Atlantic Ridge. Such rocks may 

 require modification of existing theories about the origin ot the Ridge. 




84 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



The study of these rocks, nearly completed during the past year, is 

 scheduled for completion before December 1965. 



In conjunction with Bowen, Melson began a second study, con- 

 cerning a large group of ultramafic rocks collected from St. Pauls 

 Rocks and from the surrounding sea floor. St. Pauls Rocks, situated 

 on the central portion of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, is believed by 

 many petrologists to be an upthrusted portion of the earth's mantle 

 and is thus particularly worthy of a detailed petrologic study. This 

 study to date has resulted in electron microprobe analyses of an amphi- 

 bole which has a composition approximating basalts, and is of interest 

 in connection with the origin of basalts. A preliminary publication on 

 this amphibole and associated rocks should be completed by the end 

 of 1965. 



Melson has manuscripts in press on phase equilibria in calc-silicate 

 hornfels, Lewis and Clark County, Mont., and on plagioclase-spinel- 

 graphite zenoliths in metallic iron-bearing basalts, Disko Island, 

 Greenland, and he has completed a manuscript on the geology and 

 mineral deposits of the Lincoln area, Lewis and Clark County, Mont. 

 Additional field and laboratory studies of the latter topic are planned. 

 He also began a long-term study of the igneous and metamorphic rocks 

 of west central Montana. 



Short-term studies begun during the past year include: (1) high- 

 magnesium chlorites, Natural Bridge, N.Y. (cooperatively with Mar- 

 garet Foster of the U.S. Geological Survey); (2) corundum-bearing 

 gneisses, Montana (cooperatively with George S. Switzer); (3) pumice 

 from the South Pacific Ocean (with George E. Watson of the division 

 of birds); and (4) magnetic particles from the Red Sea floor (with 

 Sidney Knott, of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, and 

 Charles Fiori). 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 1964 through June 1965 



Andersen, C. A.; Keil, K.; and Mason, Brian. Silicon oxynitride : 



a meteorite mineral. Science, vol. 146, pp. 256-257, 1964. 

 Desautels, Paul E. The gemstone collection of the U.S. National 



Museum. Lapidary Journ., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 4-11, 14, 18, 22, 



and 26-28, April 1965. 

 Fredriksson, K., and Andersen, C. A. Electronprobe analysis of 



copper in meneghinite. Amer. Mineral., vol. 49, pp. 1467-1469, 



September-October 1964. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — MINERAL SCIENCES 85 



; De Carli, P. S.; Pepin, R. O.; Turner, G.; and Reynolds, 



J. H. Shock emplaced argon in a stony meteorite. Journ. 

 Geophys. Res., vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 1403-1411, 1964. 



and Henderson, E. P. The Horse Creek, Baca County, 



Colorado, meteorite (abstr.). Trans. Amer. Geophys. Union, 

 vol. 46, p. 121, 1965. 



and Keil, K. The Fe, Mg, Ca and Ni distribution in co- 

 existing minerals in the Murray carbonaceous chondrite. Meteor- 

 itics, vol. 2, pp. 201-207, 1964. 



Henderson, E. P. Hexahedrites. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 148, 

 no. 5, 41 pp., 1965. 



and Dole, H. M. The Port Orford meteorite. Ore Bin, 



vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 113-130, 1964. 



Keil, K., and Fredriksson, K. The iron, magnesium, and calcium 

 distribution in coexisting olivines and rhombic pyroxenes of chon- 

 drites. Journ. Geophys. Res., vol. 69, pp. 3487-3515, 1964. 



; Mason, B.; Wiik, H. B.; and Fredriksson, K. The Chainpur 



meteorite. Amer. Mus. Novitates, no. 2173, 28 pp., 1964. 



Mason, Brian. The meteorite and tektite collection of the American 

 Museum of Natural History. Amer. Mus. Novitates, no. 2190, 

 40 pp., 1964. 



. Meteority [Russian transl. of Meteorites (Wiley, 1962)]. 



Mir Publ., Moscow, 305 pp., 1965. 



. Feldspar in chondrites. Science, vol. 148, p. 943, 1965. 



. The chemical composition of olivine-bronzite and olivine- 



hypersthene chondrites. Amer. Mus. Novitates, no. 2223, 38 pp., 

 1965. 



— ■ and Wiik, H. B. The composition of the Forest City, Tenn- 



asilm, Weston, and Geidam meteorites. Amer. Mus. Novitates, 



no. 2220, 20 pp., 1965. 

 Olsen, E., and Fredriksson, K. Iron phosphates in iron meteorites 



(abstr.). Trans. Amer. Geophys. Union, vol. 46, pp. 121-122, 



1965. 

 Switzer, G. Thirty-ninth annual report on the diamond industry 



1963. Jewelers' Circular-Keystone, Philadelphia, 70 pp., 1964. 

 ; Clarke, Roy S., Jr.; Sinkankas, John; and Worthing, 



Helen W. Fluorine in hambergite. Amer. Mineral., vol. 50, 



pp. 85-95, January-February 1965. 




The Collections 

 CARE AND CONSERVATION 



SPECIMENS ACCESSIONED, IDENTIFIED, AND DISTRIBUTED- 

 FISCAL YEAR 1965 



Total 



1,969 8,725 31,142 2,197 131,950 126,351 

 ANTHROPOLOGY 



Physical renovation of office and storage space in the Office of Anthro- 

 pology, and the administrative reorganization of the Office, have both 

 necessitated and made possible extensive rearrangements and improve- 

 ments in storage facilities and in procedures for processing, accessioning, 

 and cataloging new specimens. The 5000 drawers of skeletal material 

 were placed in an alphabetical arrangement of states and foreign 

 countries, with a special placing of the Huntington collection of early 

 20th-century Americans (largely born abroad). This work was skill- 

 fully supervised by Donald Ortner. The African collections were 

 placed in a systematic, geographical arrangement, and within each 

 major area many objects formerly arranged by type were rearranged 

 by tribe. The Old World archeological collections were rearranged. 

 And the Smithsonian's sizable collection of Japanese ceramics was 

 classified according to geographic regions and to the kilns of Japan. 

 Objects resulting from acculturation, whether made for export or for 

 sophisticated local use, were placed apart from the traditional specimens. 

 Rearrangement and reidentification of the Japanese ceramics were 

 greatly facilitated by the assistance of Mr. and Mrs. Victor Hauge. 



The American Foundation for the Study of Man has loaned the 

 Museum all its archeological material from southern Arabia, the 

 finest and largest such collection in the world, and except for selected 

 specimens to be used in the new hall of Old World archeology, this will 

 be maintained as a separate study collection. 

 86 




THE COLLECTIONS CARE AND CONSERVATION 87 



All the paintings that were made by Europeans or other non-native 

 artists and that were in the former division of ethnology have been 

 transferred on a long-term loan to the National Collection of Fine Arts. 

 This includes, particularly, the extensive series of Indian paintings by 

 George Catlin and the excellent facsimiles of the paintings of John 

 White. 



The archives formerly part of the Bureau of American Ethnology 

 are now a part of the Office of Anthropology and continue to serve 

 anthropologists and other scholars throughout the world. Several 

 extensive collections of photographs were cataloged, particularly 

 covering the years from 1890 to the early 1900's and mainly recording 

 details from tribes of the Plains and Southwest, but also including the 

 Maya and Seminole. 



Most significant were the creation of a single processing laboratory for 

 archeological and ethnological materials, and the institution of im- 

 proved procedures for handling incoming collections and the constant 

 outgo of materials for loans, identifications, and study by visitors. 

 Management of the six Museum aides, technicians, and specialists 

 engaged in this work is a responsibility of Clifford Evans. 



A. Joseph Andrews continued his repair, restoration, and casting 

 work with the limited facilities thus far available for the conservation 

 laboratory. Among the items handled were two elaborately painted 

 wooden doors from India; a marimba from Guatemala; pottery from 

 China, Egypt, Libya, Brazil, and the Pima, Acoma, and Zuni Indians; 

 and a Sioux tobacco pipe. 



The illustrating staff, consisting of Edward G. Schumacher, aided 

 part-time by G. Robert Lewis and Marcia Bakry, prepared for the 

 publications of the research staff a large number of scientific drawings 

 and maps. 



VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



The end of the year saw all divisions of the department, except 

 fishes, in new quarters and the reorganization of their collection man- 

 agement and research facilities in process or completed. 



To improve management of the fish collections, the ledger-type 

 catalog books were replaced by a 3- by 5-inch card file. This new 

 system provides complete data in the jar with each cataloged lot; 

 it automatically provides duplicate cards for cross-reference purposes, 

 and it is adaptable to automatic recorders and to data processing 

 systems. 



Since color discrimination is important in systematic research on 

 birds, the problem of supplying reproducible light conditions has been 




88 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



solved by the installation of banks of new Examolite fixtures over the 

 five permanent work surfaces in the bird range. These generate a 

 light spectrum very near that of natural sunlight. 



INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



The long-awaited move of the marine-invertebrate collections to 

 new quarters in the west wing was made in March and April of this 

 year. Its accomplishment in somewhat less than four weeks was made 

 possible only by the complete cooperation of all staff members, and 

 especially by the coordination of all aspects of the move by museum 

 specialist Henry B. Roberts, who devoted much of the year to the 

 manifold details necessary for the transfer of over 450,000 bottles of 

 specimens and their rearrangement in the process of transfer. 



Normal curatorial activities continued, nonetheless. Marian H. 

 Pettibone arranged for the acquisition of the Berkeley collection of 

 Polychaeta, traveling to Nanimo, British Columbia, to supervise 

 its labelling and packing. David L. Pawson, having assessed the 

 requirements of the echinoderm collection, instituted an international 

 exchange program with 30 institutions in more than 20 countries to 

 broaden the scope of the collection and enhance its value as a reference 

 tool. And Joseph Rosewater completed an index to the uncataloged 

 collections of mollusks, which include over 1100 miscellaneous acces- 

 sions; these specimens, only generally available previously, are now 

 more readily accessible and may be incorporated into the general 

 collection more rapidly. 



ENTOMOLOGY 



Under grants from the National Science Foundation more than 10,000 

 water beetles and 14,133 specimens of Ataenius have been prepared for 

 critical study. The transfer of Hemiptera collections into the unit 

 tray system was completed this year. Carl J. Drake continued to 

 improve the Drake collection so that now the combined Museum and 

 Drake material contain more than 80 percent (1491) of the 1820 species 

 of the family Tingidae (lacebugs). Research associate Carl F. W. 

 Muesebeck and members of the Department of Agriculture staff have 

 added to the collection of Hymenoptera large deposits of specimens 

 from biological studies. Approximately 20,000 newly acquired 

 specimens of Lepidoptera were prepared and sorted by Mrs. Joan 

 M. Ledbetter, and approximately 2500 North American chrysaugine 

 moths were consolidated and reorganized by summer intern E. D. 

 Cashatt. The New World Glyphipterygidae were reclassified and 




THE COLLECTIONS CARE AND CONSERVATION 89 



properly arranged as was much of the large collection of Brassolidae. 

 Approximately 3000 newly acquired Microlepidoptera were prepared 

 for critical examination. 



An important achievement concerns the enormous F. C. Bishopp col- 

 lection of ticks, of which, when it was received, practically all of the 

 specimens were dried out. During the past year Mrs. Sophie G. 

 Lutterlough restored 35,000 specimens by treating them with trisodium- 

 phosphate solution and then reintroducing them into alcohol. The 

 gradual introduction of trisodium-phosphate solution into the vials of 

 dried specimens by means of a large syringe avoids disturbing the 

 specimens and thus prevents damage. Ralph E. Crabill and Mrs. 

 Lutterlough have restored, relabeled, and rehoused 3000 myriapods 

 and arachnids, among which 40 unsuspected type specimens were 

 found. In addition, 1118 microscope slides were cleaned and sorted, 

 and 14,600 specimens from the Hopkins collection were treated. 



PALEOBIOLOGY 



Because of increased need for space, the division of paleobotany 

 was assigned to new quarters in the recently completed west wing of 

 the Natural History Museum. For the first time, the entire paleobo- 

 tanical collections of the Museum and those of the U.S. Geological 

 Survey housed in the Museum are located in a single area. The collec- 

 tions are arranged in order of stratigraphic occurrence and further 

 arranged alphabetically by State under each age category. Foreign 

 collections are maintained as a separate unit categorized first by strati- 

 graphic occurrence and then alphabetically by country. The type 

 collections are housed separately. The work of segregating specimens 

 and preparing a type-specimen catalog by museum specialist James P. 

 Ferrigno has been interrupted by the move. 



Museum specialist Louis R. Purnell completed a card file of type 

 specimens in the Paleozoic ammonite collection of invertebrate paleon- 

 tology. Three major-type collections have now been fully curated and 

 manuscript lists prepared for the publication of a series of catalogs of 

 type specimens which will supersede the 1905 catalog in part. 



Research associate Remington Kellogg undertook a major reorgani- 

 zation of the extensive study collections of fossil marine mammals. 

 This involved identification and the completing or furnishing of catalog 

 data. The segments of the national collection of fossil fish, involving 

 the scales, otoliths, agnathans, acanthodians, and placoderms were 

 trimmed, cleaned, completely reorganized in storage, and their docu- 

 mentation revised by David H. Dunkle with the aid of summer intern 

 James McKenney. 




90 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 



SPECIMENS IN THE NATIONAL COLLECTIONS MAY 31, 1965 



Department of Anthropology 1,000,010 



Archeology 773, 562 



Ethnology 188,645 



Physical Anthropology 37, 803 



Department of Invertebrate Zoology 11,962,150 



Marine Invertebrates 2,113,365 



Mollusks 9,848,785 



Department of Vertebrate Zoology 2, 793, 396 



Mammals 325, 746 



Birds 514,209 



Reptiles and Amphibians 161, 564 



Fishes 1,791,877 



Department of Entomology 16,489,253 



(Former Division of Insects total, 1963 15,978,513) 



Coleoptera 134,085 



Hemiptera '. 132,880 



Lepidoptera 121, 595 



Myriapoda and Arachnida 23, 238 



Neuropteroids 98, 942 



Department of Botany 3,118,587 



Phanerogams 1, 963, 362 



Ferns 237,177 



Grasses 387, 269 



Cryptogams 486, 881 



Plant Anatomy 43, 898 



Department of Paleobiology 13,179,166 



Invertebrate Paleontology 13,128,197 



Vertebrate Paleontology 48, 055 



Paleobotany . 2,914 



Department of Mineral Sciences 422, 541 



Mineralogy & Petrology 417,212 



Meteorites 5, 329 



Total Natural History Collections 48,965,103 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



To the physical-anthropology collections were added a series of 24 

 skeletons from Buena Vista, Ecuador, excavated by Emilio Estrada. 



In connection with the preparation of new African ethnological 

 exhibits, a collection of 69 items from Libya and a collection of ten 

 specimens from Zambia were secured. 




THE COLLECTIONS — GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 91 



Among the outstanding ethnological Asian materials received and 

 accessioned are the Tokyo National Museum collection, with 54 speci- 

 mens including rural tools and basketry; the Government of the Ryukyu 

 Islands collection, with 71 items emphasizing the wide range existing in 

 traditional textile production; the Beue Tann collection, with 49 

 objects related to Chinese calligraphy; 16 exceptional examples of 

 Japanese folk art, from Mr. and Mrs. Victor Hauge; 23 Nepalese 

 carvings, from Paul Rose; and 37 Jewish ritual objects made by well- 

 known Israeli craftsmen, from Dr. and Mrs. Abraham Kanof. 



The large series of Paleo-Indian artifacts from the Lindenmeier Site 

 in Colorado, excavated by Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., from 1935 through 

 1940, was the most important archeological material accessioned. In 

 addition, a large collection of potsherds was received from the Uni- 

 versity of Tokyo Andes Expedition, through the courtesy of its director, 

 Professor Seiichi Izumi; type specimens are included for the entire 

 range of formative period materials from the site of Kotosh in the 

 Department of Huanuco, Peru. Archeological accessions included a 

 large collection from the Brooks Range, Alaska, covering the time span 

 from the earlier human occupations to the modern Eskimo, excavated 

 by research associate John M. Campbell. An important collection 

 from the Hostermann Site in South Dakota was also received by trans- 

 fer from the River Basin Surveys. 



VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



Fishes totaling about 15,000 specimens were received from three 

 critical geographic areas: Victor G. Springer collected nearly 10,000 

 specimens of the inshore marine fish fauna of Dominica during October 

 and November 1964 as a participant of the Bredin-Archbold-Smith- 

 sonian biological survey of Dominica. These will be especially useful in 

 monographic studies of western Atlantic fishes, for no comparable 

 collections have been made in this area. Several thousand well- 

 preserved fishes from islands of Oceania were received from the Smith- 

 sonian Institution Pacific Ocean Biological Survey Program. Rich in 

 representative species of the tropical, inshore reef habitat, they fill 

 many geographic gaps from which few or no specimens are in the 

 national collections. 



From the exploratory fisheries research activities of the U.S. Fish 

 and Wildlife Service, several thousand specimens of pelagic and deep 

 sea fishes were received. Taken mainly from the Caribbean area, these 

 represent some of the best scientific collections ever obtained in the 

 region. Collections in the Western Atlantic, resulting from the Fish 




92 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



and Wildlife Service Exploratory Program, have contributed impor- 

 tantly to the great success of the Sears Foundation for Marine Research 

 monographic studies of the fishes of the western North Atlantic. 



Three major collections from the New World tropics came as gifts to 

 the collection of reptiles and amphibians from Wilmot A. Thornton, 

 Albert Schwartz, and C. J. Marinkelle. An important collection of 

 amphibians from East Africa was given by Margaret Stewart. And 587 

 specimens of reptiles and amphibians were collected in Iran for the 

 Museum by Robert G. Tuck and John Neal of the division of mammals. 



Birds accessioned this year include important new material from 

 little-known regions. The first major collection in the United States of 

 specimens from Socotra and Abd-el-Kuri in the northern Indian 

 Ocean was obtained by an expedition carried out by Alex Forbes- 

 Watson. An important collection of oceanic birds from islands in the 

 Central Pacific, obtained by the Smithsonian Pacific Ocean Biological 

 Survey Program, documents many new distribution and nesting 

 records. Some of the islands visited during the field work had never 

 before been surveyed for birds. Three collections of Latin American 

 birds totaling over 2000 skins and almost 400 anatomical specimens 

 were accessioned during the year. These include specimens collected 

 in Dominica by Richard L. Zusi, in Brazil by Philip S. Humphrey, and 

 in Panama by Alexander Wetmore, whose years of field work there have 

 brought the Museum an unparalleled collection of Panamanian birds. 

 By transfer from the Fish and Wildlife Service 1033 skins and 111 

 skeletons of North American birds were received. 



In 1965 over 8000 specimens of mammals were accessioned. The 

 largest increment came from Africa and the Middle East through the 

 efforts of Henry W. Setzer. Particularly noteworthy were 5700 

 mammals from South Africa, Mozambique, and Iran, collected on 

 grants from the Department of the Army; 1228 mammals from Pakistan 

 collected by Robert Traub and the Department of Microbiology, 

 University of Maryland; and a superb collection of 542 bats from 

 Kenya, presented by Russel E. Mumford. 



A number of important accessions were of mammals from tropical 

 America: 185 bats from northeastern Brazil, collected by Philip S. 

 Humphrey and R. E. Shope; 185 mammals from the interior of 

 British Guiana, obtained from Stanley E. Brock; Colombian bats from 

 Jose Borrero and C. J. Marinkelle; 436 Panamanian mammals, 

 mostly from Isla Cebaco, collected by E. L. Tyson on a National 

 Science Foundation grant; and 218 Nicaraguan mammals from the 

 University of Pennsylvania, through L. G. Clark. 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 93 



A number of individual specimens of unusual interest was received: 

 a skull and complete skeleton of the rare Pacific right whale from the 

 Whales Research Institute, Tokyo, through the generosity of its 

 Director, Hideo Omura; a frozen specimen of the rare Ross seal from 

 the National Science Foundation, Office of Antarctic Programs; a 

 frozen head of a pigmy sperm whale from Marineland Research 

 Laboratory; and a skull of the rare rough-toothed porpoise Steno breda- 

 nensis, from the University of Florida. The trend toward deposit of 

 types in the National Museum continues; holotypes of the new sub- 

 species of mink Mustela vision and of the bat Chiroderma salvini were 

 contributed by the Alaska Department of Game and Fish and the 

 University of Arizona, respectively. 



INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



Perhaps the largest and most significant addition to the invertebrate 

 zoology collections this year was the more than 10,000 specimens of 

 Polychaeta collected by Edith and Cyril Berkeley of the Pacific Bio- 

 logical Laboratory at Nanaimo, British Columbia. This collection 

 represents the accumulation of over 40 years of work, most of it having 

 been the subject of study and scientific publication by this team. The 

 significance and content of the collection have been described by 

 Marian H. Pettibone in a paper soon to be published. The deposition 

 in the Museum of an important collection such as this assures its per- 

 manent availability to students. 



By exchange, 212 specimens of isopods were obtained from the 

 Zoological Institute, Leningrad, U.S.S.R.; and 500 specimens of mol- 

 lusks, from Tonga and the subantarctic islands of New Zealand, were 

 obtained from the Dominion Museum, Wellington, New Zealand. 

 Purchased through the Chamberlain fund were 3290 marine shells 

 from North Borneo, collected by Mrs. Mary Saul, and 610 from Muscat, 

 Oman, by Donald T. Bosch. 



Colleagues in other institutions and universities often deposit their 

 study collections in the national collections when their researches are 

 complete. In this manner 2354 specimens of copepods collected by 

 Arthur Humes of Boston University were donated to the Museum. 

 They were obtained during Humes' researches at Nosy Be, Malagasy 

 Republic, as a part of the Indian Ocean Expedition. 



ENTOMOLOGY 



The largest, and perhaps most outstanding, contribution made to 

 the entomological collections this year, that obtained in the western 




94 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Mexican states by Paul Spangler and his family, consisted of 50,850 

 specimens, of which 32,000 were water beetles. Spangler also donated 

 7000 specimens from his personal collection. J. F. Gates Clarke and 

 his wife contributed 11,674 specimens from the remote island of Rapa, 

 obtained with the aid of a grant from the Office of Naval Research, and 

 2622 specimens from Arkansas. Ronald W. Hodges presented 3000 

 Goleoptera through the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Oliver S. 

 Flint contributed 2062 beetles from the West Indies, and 2000 beetles 

 of the subfamily Aphodiinae were obtained from Argentina. 



To the Hemiptera collections were added 5000 specimens from George 

 F. Knowlton, 1169 specimens from George E. Bohart, and 651 speci- 

 mens from Oliver S. Flint, Jr. To the Lepidoptera collections were 

 added a notable number of small but important contributions, con- 

 spicuous among which were the more than 3900 specimens collected 

 in the Malagasy Republic by E. D. Cashatt and K. I. Lange; 791 

 butterflies from Greece collected by J. G. Coutsis; 1300 New Zealand 

 moths contributed by T. H. Da vies;. 632 Hydrelia flies from D. L. Donier 

 and J. L. Laffoon; 5000 specimens collected in Florida by Ronald W. 

 Hodges; 495 European flies from D. L. Knutson; 890 Alaskan flies 

 from K. M. Sommerman; and 2336 flies collected by George G. 

 Steyskal, primarily in Egypt and North America. 



Donald R. Davis contributed over 5000 specimens from Arizona and 

 New Mexico; W. Donald Duckworth and his wife obtained 10,125 

 moths and flies from Panama; Oliver S. Flint, Jr., contributed 1887 

 Lepidoptera and Diptera from the West Indies and the United States; 

 and Waldo L. Schmitt presented 458 flies collected by him in Antarctica 

 and New Zealand. 



Particularly important additions to the collection of biting and sucking 

 lice were made by K. G. Emerson who deposited 1160 slides, including 

 33 holotypes, of these insects. In addition, he was responsible for the 

 transfer of 919 slides of these important ectoparasites from the Depart- 

 ment of the Army. Ralph E. Crabill, Jr., presented 402 European 

 myriapods, almost all the species of which were previously unrepre- 

 sented in the collections. Yu Hsi Moltze Wang presented 107 identi- 

 fied Formosan myriapods, none previously represented in the col- 

 lections. Waldo L. Schmitt presented 2383 mites from New Zealand 

 and Antarctica, noteworthy because of the paucity of material in the 

 collections from this part of the world. 



BOTANY 



Noteworthy among the wide diversity of botanical research materials 

 from various areas of the globe added to the collections was a group 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 95 



of 1 330 herbarium specimens of flowering plants received by exchange 

 through the Botanical Institute of the Academy of Sciences of the 

 U.S.S.R. A group of 1250 microscope slides of cleared strobili of 

 Selaginella was received as a gift from Northwestern University. These 

 slides document published research of Howard J. Arnott and Harry T. 

 Horner, based largely on collections in the National Herbarium, on the 

 disposition of mega- and microspores in this genus. The historically 

 valuable diatom collection of M. L. Walsh, received as a gift from Mrs. 

 Walsh of Baltimore, included 920 microscope slides, 350 samples of 

 diatomaceous earth, and 385 bottles of liquid-preserved diatom- 

 bearing materials. These represent careful collections from almost 

 all the known diatom deposits in southern Maryland, many of which 

 have now been exhausted or otherwise obliterated. Conrad V. 

 Morton added 2595 photographs of fern types prepared in European 

 herbaria. A collection of 1 50 ferns constituting three series of "Filices 

 Japonicae Exsiccatae," prepared by M. Tagawa and K. Iwatsuki, was 

 accessioned. These specimens contain isotypes of several new fern 

 species. Two collections of African grasses were added to the grass 

 herbarium: 385 specimens of Digitaria gathered by A. J. Oakes in West 

 Africa, and a miscellaneous assortment from R. R. Martenson, a mis- 

 sionary in Northern Cameroun. A large set of Mexican grasses was 

 accessioned through A. Robinson of Kansas Wesleyan University, who 

 identified them during a visit to the National Herbarium. Three 

 groups of wood specimens were accessioned from Southeast Asia: a 

 small but rare set from Cambodia, received on exchange from the 

 French Centre Technique Forestier Tropical; 120 specimens from 

 Thailand, donated by Robert M. King; and 220 woods from the 

 Philippines, from William L. Stern. The latter two accessions com- 

 prise excellent research materials, since the identifications of all speci- 

 mens are corroborated by herbarium vouchers. Other important 

 accessions included 330 specimens of European mosses received on 

 exchange from the University of Helsinki and 635 lichen specimens 

 from southeastern United States, collected by Mason E. Hale, Jr. 



PALEOBIOLOGY 



Among the specimens accessioned by the division of paleobotany, 

 those of major importance include the 142 type or figured specimens 

 received as gifts, of which a few examples are: the Goucher collection 

 of cycadeoid trunk sections, representing the finest collection of de- 

 scribed specimens from the Lower Cretaceous of Maryland, from 

 Goucher College; the earliest described specimen of an American 

 cycadeoid, from Johns Hopkins University; and, among the microfossils, 




96 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



12 holotypes of Maestrichtian and Danian calcareous nanno plankton 

 from Alabama, Arkansas, France, and Denmark, from M. N. Bramlette 

 and E. Martini. From the Walcott fund was purchased 1000 pounds 

 of selected Rhynie chert. This quantity of material constitutes the 

 largest single collection in the United States of this classic Middle 

 Devonian plant-bearing material. From the Roland W. Brown fund 

 was purchased an excellent exhibit specimen of the Lower Cretaceous 

 cycadeoid Cycadeoidea marylandica, found near Laurel, Md. Also pur- 

 chased was a collection of fossil plants from the Eocene of Bolca, Italy. 

 Exchange with the Paleobotaniska Avdelning, Naturhistoriska Riks- 

 museets in Stockholm, Sweden, brought in 89 specimens of Chinese 

 Permo-Carboniferous plants and 44 Swedish Rhaeto-Liassic plants. 



A collection of amphibians and therapsid reptiles from the Permo- 

 Triassic of the Karoo region in South Africa, outstanding in being 

 probably the best documented Beaufort collection to date, was made 

 by Nicholas Hotton under a grant from the National Science Founda- 

 tion and with the help of J. W. Kitching of the Bernard Price Institute 

 in Johannesburg. It includes about 312 specimens consisting of skulls, 

 partial and complete skeletons, and identifiable fragments, and is 

 particularly strong in the herbivorous anomodonts. A collection of 

 about 550 specimens of early mammals was made by C. L. Gazin, 

 assisted by Franklin L. Pearce, under a grant from the National Science 

 Foundation. The greater part, about 320 specimens, consisted of jaws 

 and maxillae of a variety of rare Paleocene mammals from Puerco and 

 Torrejon horizons of the Nacimiento formation in New Mexico. The 

 remaining portion of the collection was obtained principally from the 

 Lysite early Eocene and Chadronian Oligocene of the Wind River 

 Basin, Wyo., greatly increasing our representation of the smaller 

 mammals of these horizons. 



David H. Dunkle, assisted by Gladwyn B. Sullivan, during the latter 

 part of the summer season made a collection of about 115 specimens 

 of vertebrate and invertebrate animals under support from the Walcott 

 fund. Of these specimens, 81 were fossil fish secured from a clay pit 

 in the upper Madera formation near Tijeras, N. Mex. Particular 

 mention may be made of unusually complete skeletons of acanthodian 

 and a variety of palaeoniscoid fishes, as well as the fragmentary remains 

 of several sharks and a caelacanthine. 



An outstanding addition to the invertebrate-paleontology collections 

 was made possible by the Walcott fund: during the winter of 1963-64, 

 Richard E. Grant, of the U.S. Geological Survey, accompanied by 

 Ali N. Fatmi, of the Geological Survey of Pakistan, made an extensive 

 collection of Permian fossils from the Productus Limestone of the Salt, 

 Khisor, and Surghar Ranges of West Pakistan; these consist of an 




Specimens of the feather-duster worm Sabellastarte magnified photographed 

 alive in Puerto Rico. This photograph, in color, is being used by modelmaker 

 Alfred Strohlein seen (below, left) discussing with Curator Charles Cutress 

 the early stages of a model for exhibition. 




Line of visitors waiting to see exhibit of the Dead Sea Scrolls of Jordan in the 

 foyer gallery of the Museum of Natural History. Such lines were common, 

 and during the 22 days the Scrolls were on display over 200,000 persons 

 were recorded entering the gallery. 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 97 



estimated 35,000 specimens and an additional undetermined number 

 that will be freed from limestone blocks by dissolution in hydrochloric 

 acid. This collection, which is to be shared by the Geological Survey 

 of Pakistan, will provide a basis for direct comparison of American 

 Permian specimens with those from the best known Permian sequence 

 in Asia, since the Productus Limestone of the Salt Range is a standard 

 for reference and correlation of Permian rocks of all parts of the world, 

 and its fauna must be considered in connection with Permian studies 

 everywhere. The Pakistan collection, a valuable addition to the 

 national collections under any circumstances, is especially valuable 

 in view of the extensive program of Permian studies now under way. 

 The Walcott fund also supported field work which resulted in several 

 other important additions to the collections, each of several thousand 

 specimens. These include Devonian invertebrates from southern 

 New Mexico, collected by G. Arthur Cooper and J. T. Dutro; Ordo- 

 vician Bryozoa from measured sections and type localities in north- 

 eastern New York, by Richard S. Boardman and Olgerts Karklins; 

 and invertebrates from the Middle Ordovician at Paquette Rapids, 

 Ont., by Ellis Yochelson. 



MINERAL SCIENCES 



To the collections were added 11 meteorites not previously repre- 

 sented, as well as 2066 grams of tektites received from the Ames 

 Research Center of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 



A major effort is being made to acquire for the petrographic reference 

 collections specimens of rocks that have been described and chemically 

 analyzed. About 100 such rocks were acquired during the year, most 

 of them by transfer from the U.S. Geological Survey. 



Of the many important additions to the mineralogy collections, 

 three were of outstanding importance: Harry Winston, Inc., presented 

 to the Smithsonian in memory of Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, former 

 Chairman of the Board of De Beers Consolidated Mines, Ltd., a 

 magnificent gem-quality diamond crystal weighing 253.7 carats, 

 from the Dutoitspan Mine, Republic of South Africa; John B. Jago 

 of San Francisco donated his collection of minerals, numbering nearly 

 4000 specimens and generally considered to be the finest contemporary 

 private collection in the United States; and Mr. and Mrs. Lennart 

 Erickson of Palo Alto, Calif., donated three outstanding gems: a 117- 

 carat emerald cabochon brooch, a 126-carat aquamarine, and a 50.5- 

 carat rubellite tourmaline. 



789-^27—66 14 




Exhibits 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



An exhibit of Dead Sea Scrolls from Jordan was shown in the foyer 

 gallery of the Museum of Natural History from February 27 through 

 March 21. Negotiations for loan of the specimens and accompanying 

 photographs, conducted by Gus W. Van Beek and the Department of 

 State, had been in progress since 1960 with the Government of Jor- 

 dan, which generously loaned the material for the Smithsonian ex- 

 hibit. One of the most popular ever presented in the Museum, 

 the exhibit was kept open Friday, Saturday, and Sunday evenings; 

 and during its 22 days 209,643 persons were recorded as visiting it. 

 The exhibition provided a synopsis of the story of the Dead Sea Scrolls 

 in four sections: first, the discovery; second, the Essenes, the people 

 of the Scrolls, and their community; third, the Scrolls themselves and 

 their significance for historical and religious studies; and fourth, the 

 techniques of Scroll research and publication. Van Beek was assisted 

 in preparation of the exhibit by a number of internationally known 

 scholars and by Rolland O. Hower, of the Smithsonian's exhibit 

 staff, who was chief designer. The imaginative and effective arrange- 

 ment, created for temporary traveling display, will eventually ac- 

 company the material back to Jordan, where it will become part of the 

 permanent Palestine archeological exhibits. The material was sched- 

 uled for display in Philadelphia, Berkeley, Claremont, Omaha, and 

 Baltimore, and will then go to Canada and England before its return 

 to Jordan. This exhibit is an outstanding example of how much 

 can be done to associate the meaning and significance of a group of 

 objects with the objects themselves, stressing ideas in the exhibit 

 rather than merely presenting specimens. 



Substantial progress was made in the African hall, in the hall of 

 physical anthropology, and in the hall of Old World archeology. 

 In the preparation of African materials, it was fortunately possible 

 to undertake extensive restoration, cleaning, and repair of important 

 specimens — some of them old and unique. A special crew, under 

 contract, in the course of the year treated 288 separate items, of which 

 the largest number were spears and swords and among the most 

 important were wood carvings and masks, some of them among the 

 oldest surviving from parts of Africa. They similarly treated over 100 

 specimens for exhibit in the hall of Old World archeology. 



A significant achievement was made by the plastics laboratory of the 

 Office of Exhibits in the making of new casts of important works of 



98 




EXHIBITS 99 



sculpture. Previously such casts have been made of plaster, and re- 

 sulted in heavy, fragile specimens requiring considerable maintenance, 

 including frequent repainting. Under the supervision of John C. 

 Widener, old plaster casts are now being replaced with casts made of 

 plastic. This involves cleaning and repairing the plaster cast, making 

 a rubber mold of it, and then casting a reinforced, colored plastic 

 duplicate. These new duplicates are light in weight, strong, and resis- 

 tant to damage; they have the color built in and can be maintained 

 by an occasional washing with detergent and water. A number of 

 monochrome plastic casts have been made of reliefs from Zinjirli, 

 Persepolis, and Nineveh. Much more ambitious was the copying in 

 plastic of a large Egyptian red-granite lion, utilizing techniques devel- 

 oped by Walter G. Sorrell. Using a fragment of Egyptian red granite 

 as a guide, he made thin sheets of plastic reproducing the colors of the 

 different crystals in the granite. These sheets were then broken into 

 chips of various sizes, distributed over the surface of the mold, and a 

 pink plastic matrix poured over them. The result is a magnificent 

 cast which so nearly approximates the original stone that a fragment of 

 the red granite placed against the plastic cast becomes lost in its back- 

 ground. These techniques hold considerable promise for newer 

 museums that are no longer able to acquire original sculptures from 

 abroad. 



Work continued on the preparation and installation of the remaining 

 few exhibits in the Asian hall, and collections already in the Museum 

 were augmented with eight contemporary objects donated by Dr. and 

 Mrs. Abram Kanof through the Jewish Museum in New York, and 

 three specimens given by the Embassy of Israel. 



Installation of the Hall of Physical Anthropology approached its 

 final stages with sections on man as a primate, on human biological 

 variation, on pathology, and on the populations of the world, being 

 produced. The section of exhibits on fossil man and a panel on mech- 

 anisms of evolution are the only portions remaining for future prepara- 

 tion. The world map showing body-build silhouettes of various popu- 

 lations and accurate face masks of individuals from all parts of the world, 

 has turned out to be particularly impressive and informative. 



On May 25, 1965, fire caused by a faulty electrical circuit gutted 

 two cases in the Indian hall, one exhibiting Zuni and Hopi kachina 

 figures, some of them collected as early as 1870 by such early explorers 

 and scholars as Burke, Powell, Wheeler, Palmer, Cushing, and Steven- 

 son, and the other, objects from the Spanish Mission period of the 

 southwestern United States, illustrating the transition from Indian 

 religious concepts to Catholicism. Nearly all of the objects in these 




100 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



two exhibits were a total loss, although a few of the kachina figures can 

 still be used for scientific study though not for exhibition. An ad- 

 joining case illustrating the life of the Cocopa Indians was somewhat 

 damaged by water and flames, but all of the material was saved. 



VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



A model of a giant-sized black marlin, Makaira indica, captured by 

 the donor, Alfred C. Glassell, Jr., provided a spectacular addition 

 to the hall of life in the sea. The marlin, a world record for rod and reel, 

 was captured off Cabo Blanco, Peru, and measured 14% feet in length 

 and weighed 1560 pounds. 



Members of the curatorial staff participated in the planning and de- 

 sign of the hall of osteology, which opened during the year, and the 

 hall of cold-blooded vertebrates. The latter is in process of construc- 

 tion, and considerable progress has been made in obtaining material 

 for the topical and habitat cases. 



The freeze-dry method of preserving reptiles continues to be highly 

 satisfactory and efficient. Freeze-drying of amphibians often brings a 

 whitish wax to the surface, which is easily painted out by a thin coat of 

 oil paint. 



On the basis of his experience in Chile and Antarctica last year, 

 George E. Watson provided scripts for three cases in the temporary 

 exhibition "Image of Chile," on display in fall of 1964. 



INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



Work on the hall of life in the sea progressed slowly throughout the 

 year, with no additional exhibits opened. For alcove cases depicting 

 reproduction and parental care, many models have been completed 

 and work on others begun under the direction of Charles E. Cutress, 

 Thomas E. Bowman, and David L. Pawson. In these exhibits an 

 attempt is being made to show, by enlarged models, some of the many 

 fascinating ways and devices by which marine invertebrates repro- 

 duce their kind and provide protection for their eggs and young. 

 Methods of reproduction, ranging from simple asexual splitting to the 

 complex courtship behavior associated with sexual reproduction in a 

 fiddler crab, and examples displaying parental care have been selected 

 from as wide a range of animals as possible, so that these cases will also 

 serve to illustrate the great diversity of form and structure in inverte- 

 brate animals. 



With the assistance of summer intern Durbin Dixon, coral specimens 

 were produced for inclusion in the coral-reef life group, but significant 




EXHIBITS 101 



progress on this exhibit awaits construction of viewing ports and 

 supporting steel work. 



Accompanied by Kjell B. Sandved, Cutress collected selected in- 

 vertebrates and took over 1200 color photographs of living animals in 

 Puerto Rico during August and September 1964. These, together 

 with detailed notes, will form the basis for the construction of the models 

 required for adequate representation of many of the minute and deli- 

 cate invertebrate forms. Among the many specimens photographed 

 was the large Caribbean feather-duster worm Sabellastarte magnified, 

 selected to represent a polychaete annelid and a particular feeding 

 mechanism. A model maker will construct with plastics and waxes an 

 enlarged representation of this organism, working from the preserved 

 specimens, notes, and photographs. Cutress continued to supervise 

 the construction of models, for which data were obtained during a 

 similar trip to the Hawaiian Islands in the previous year. 



PALEOBIOLOGY 



Clayton E. Ray was heavily occupied in developing plans for the 

 hall of Quaternary vertebrates in collaboration with designer Lucius 

 E. Lomax, of the Office of Exhibits. The laboratory of vertebrate 

 paleontology made progress in mounting skeletons for exhibition in 

 this hall of a Rancho La Brea group that includes the sabre-tooth cat 

 Smilodon californicus, the ground sloth Paramylodon harlani, and the horse 

 Equus occidentalis. Restoration has been completed preparatory to 

 mounting the 4-horned antelope Stockoceros onusrosagrus from the 

 Pleistocene of Arizona, received in an exchange from the Frick Lab- 

 oratories at the American Museum in New York. Much progress also 

 has been made in restoring the two giant ground sloths Eremotherium 

 rusconii, secured by C. Lewis Gazin from the Pleistocene of Panama, 

 which are to serve as the central display in the hall. 



MINERAL SCIENCES 



Construction was completed for new physical geology, meteorite, 

 and jade exhibits, and for a major enlargement and revision of the 

 gem exhibit. Paul E. Desautels wrote scripts for all the gem exhibit 

 cases, the design was completed by Mrs. Dorothy Guthrie, and rein- 

 stallation begun. When the gem exhibit was closed for revision in 

 January 1965, a temporary exhibit was set up in the adjacent mineral 

 hall. Edward P. Henderson and William G. Melson began writing 

 scripts for the meteorite and physical geology exhibits, and the design 

 and production of these will be started as soon as the gem and jade 

 rooms are completed and reopened to the public in summer 1965. 





Museum of History and Technology 





Mrs. Lyndon Johnson during inspection of plans for Music on the Mall at the 

 Museum of History and Technology. Secretary Ripley, left, is showing her a 

 bass ophecliede from the collection of musical instruments. Below: Part of 

 audience of over three thousand at concert of band music of the 1860's, 

 played on restored Civil War-period instruments (see p. 109). 




Specially constructed device used for 

 taking off exact measurements of 

 hulls of sunken ships. Here it is 

 being used to measure timbers on a 

 ship believed to be late 16th-century 

 Spanish, sunk off Bermuda. (See 

 pp. 105-107.) 




Museum of History and Technology 

 John C. Ewers, Director 



The Museum Historian as Scholar 



The academic historian relies upon the printed page and the written 

 document for his primary source materials in reconstructing and 

 interpreting history. The resourceful museum historian, however, is 

 not limited to verbal sources. He knows that history is written in 

 objects as well as in words. He seeks to recover the sights and sounds 

 as well as the descriptions of history. In field and laboratory he 

 seeks to employ the tools and methods of modern technology to obtain 

 a more precise understanding of how people lived in the past. He is 

 limited only by his ingenuity in making the most effective uses of 

 these resources. 



The current research program of professional historians at the 

 Museum of History and Technology provides numerous examples of 

 this broader, more ingenious approach to history. I cite only a few 

 examples. 



Buried treasure — whether it is in the ground or under the sea — 

 has excited the curiosity of generations of Americans. In recent years 

 the technical perfection of light diving gear has made undersea treas- 

 ure hunting an increasingly popular pursuit. But under the leadership 

 of Mendel L. Peterson, chairman of the Museum's department of 

 armed forces history, underwater exploration in the Western Hemi- 

 sphere has evolved from mere treasure hunting into systematic under- 

 water archeology. In solving historical problems it combines with 

 field exploration of underwater sites the study of written records of 

 shipping and shipwrecks, and of the manufacture and uses of artifacts. 

 It results in the recovery, preservation, and identification of dated 

 artifacts which help to document the progress of the introduction of 

 European culture into the New World, routes and cargoes in colonial 

 trade, and the development of ships, and of their armament and other 

 equipment. 



At underwater sites off Bermuda this year Peterson has conducted 

 research in the techniques of surveying, measuring, and recording- 

 undersea remains. Three new instruments for measuring in plan and 

 elevation were used in exploring the timber remains of a ship believed 



789-427—66—16 1Q5 




106 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



l^g 



Half plan and elevations of timber remains, measured by the method described 

 on the opposite page. Shape of the keel is conjectural. 



to be Spanish and of the late 16th century. An ingenious camera 

 stand for photographing the remains in plan was built in the form of 

 a brass tower adjustable in height. Carrying a 35-mm. camera at 

 the top, the tower is set over the timber remains which have been 

 marked with numbered "tacks" in a grid pattern. The photographs, 

 taken in succession as the tower is moved over the site, later are as- 

 sembled in a photographic mosaic which becomes a valuable guide 

 to the artist making the finished drawing of the remains. 



Two instruments for measuring remains in elevation proved to be 

 very successful. The first, a simple sighting device, is settled in the 

 middle of the site and leveled. With this instrument, a theoretical 




MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY INTRODUCTION 107 



plane is established, and at each corner of a square encompassing the 

 site datum rods are then set in the sea bottom, clear of the timber 

 remains. With this sighting device, targets are set on the datum rods 

 and securely fastened. These remain in place throughout the measuring 

 operation. 



After the theoretical plane is established, a measuring frame con- 

 sisting of heavy aluminum beams is placed on steel stanchions set 

 vertically on the keelson of the timber remains. The frame is then 

 secured to the stanchions at the plane established by the sighting device. 

 Attached to this frame is a rack in which ride — at 6-inch intervals — 

 measuring rods scaled in inches. Over each ship's timber in turn, 

 starting at one end and progressing along the remains, the rack is set, 

 leveled with the beam, and anchored at the outer end. The measuring 

 rods are then lowered to contact the frame, and readings are taken 

 directly from them. In this manner the curvature of each of the ship's 

 frames is established. From these data, recorded with a grease pencil 

 on white plastic sheets, an accurate elevation of the remains can be 

 drawn. 



Techniques for preserving objects recovered from underwater sites 

 meanwhile are being perfected through research in the Museum 

 laboratory. These studies include the perfection of a more rapid 

 method for dehydrating organic materials, and the uses, for wood 

 specimens, of preservatives that penetrate and strengthen the specimens. 



Peterson's History Under the Sea: A handbook for underwater exploration, 

 published in 1965, provides the first handbook on this subject ever 

 printed. This pioneer text and its 56 plates cover the surveying of 

 underwater sites, field preparation of materials recovered from these 

 sites, laboratory techniques for preserving artifacts from underwater 

 explorations, and photographic reproductions of selected metal, glass, 

 and pottery specimens recovered from underwater sites and processed 

 in the laboratory. 



Eugene Ostroff, associate curator of photography, employed modern 

 technology in pioneering another field of historical research. Recog- 

 nizing that image discoloration and fading was making old photo- 

 graphs in the collections useless for reference or exhibition, he investi- 

 gated the causes of this deterioration and explored the practicality of 

 restoring the image. With some of the earliest photographs made by 

 W. H. F. Talbot of England, who in 1839 invented the photographic 

 negative, he obtained strikingly successful results. Faded prints in 

 which the image was not visible to the eye were irradiated with neutrons 

 in a reactor at the Brookhaven National Laboratories. This converted 

 some of the image silver into radioactive isotopes. When an unexposed 

 sheet of x-ray film was placed in contact with the original for a short 




108 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



time, then processed, a clearly visible restored image corresponding to 

 the original appeared on the x-ray film. 



Old photographs can be important historical documents. It is 

 expected that the historian of the future will be indebted to Ostroff for 

 his discovery of a means to recover the lost images on these faded 

 documents. 



The use of the modern tape recorder in gaining knowledge of the 

 past from living informants has proved an effective method of research 

 in a variety of historical projects. Edwin A. Battison, associate cur- 

 ator of mechanical and civil engineering, obtained from the surviving 

 inventor, J. Frank Duryea, information on the construction of the 

 Duryea automobile built in 1892-93, one of the first gasoline-powered 

 automobiles built in the United States and the oldest in our collection. 

 On the basis of these interviews with the inventor it was possible to 

 restore missing details of the vehicle. The recorded data also pro- 

 vided some of the information for Donald H. Berkebile's account of its 

 construction, The 1893 Duryea Automobile, published by the Smithsonian 

 Institution this year. 



C. Malcolm Watkins, curator of cultural history, carried a tape 

 recorder to rural Moore County in North Carolina to record surviving 

 folk-pottery traditions in an area where country folk have made 

 red earthenware and salt-glazed pottery since before the American 

 Revolution. There Ben Owen charmingly recalled how his grand- 

 father had made pottery and described how he himself carried on 

 the family tradition — from the digging of the clay to the removal of the 

 fired pot from the kiln. Mrs. Joan Watkins supplemented the oral 

 account with an extensive series of color photographs of this potter's 

 shop and of the stages in his making of pottery. Examples of this 

 pottery were obtained for the Museum collections. 



In the mountains of Virginia and North Carolina last fall Jay Scott 

 Odell, museum specialist in the section of musical instruments, recorded 

 traditional folk songs of the Appalachian Highlands played on the 

 dulcimer and banjo, and descriptions of the making and use of these 

 instruments from the lips of their makers or the musically talented 

 descendants of makers. At the same time he photographed the playing 

 of a dulcimer, made about 1875, which he later obtained for the na- 

 tional collections. Such thorough documentation will be appreciated 

 by the historian of future years. 



The sounds of history were sweet indeed in the series of concerts 

 arranged by Mrs. Cynthia Adams Hoover, associate curator of musical 

 instruments, during the year. The November 11, 1964, concert of 

 Gustav Leonhardt, harpsichordist, playing on the Museum's restored 




MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY INTRODUCTION 109 



1754 Dulcken harpsichord, and Frans Brueggen, recorder player, 

 was considered one of the highlights of the Washington musical year. 

 At popular request, a program of the music of the 1860's, played on 

 brass instruments of that period from the collections, was repeated 

 in an open-air concert on the Mall in June. The musical arrangements 

 were taken directly from handbooks of the Third New Hampshire 

 Regiment of the 1860's. These and other concerts, played upon the 

 kinds of instruments for which the music was written, not only delight 

 those in attendance but are recorded for the study of musicians and 

 historians. 



Surely the museum historian is no less concerned with written his- 

 tory than is the academic historian — but he consults a greater variety 

 of sources. He reads history not only in letters and documents, but 

 also in illustrated trade catalogs, magazine and newspaper advertise- 

 ments, plans, drawings, paintings, prints, and photographs, and in 

 three-dimensional objects as well. 



The museum historian has the same dedication to detailed accuracy 

 as does the scholar in the natural sciences. He requires the same 

 precision in restoring a hundred-year-old machine tool or a two-hun- 

 dred-year-old highboy as does the paleontologist in his restoration 

 of a hundred-million -year-old dinosaur. 



In his field work the museum historian's methods resemble those 

 successfully employed by the anthropologist, be he an archeologist 

 exploring a prehistoric site occupied by a little-known primitive people, 

 or an ethnologist obtaining from an aged American Indian informant 

 verbal information on tribal customs of six decades ago. Historic- 

 site archeology — on land and under the sea — offers the historian oppor- 

 tunities to recover plans of ships and of domestic, industrial, and 

 military structures about which little information is available in written 

 sources, as well as possibilities of recovering dated artifacts which will 

 help to document other undated ones. The oral testimony of elderly 

 men and women provides previously unrecorded details about inven- 

 tions, manufacturing and crafts processes, and the disappearance or 

 survival of traditional arts and crafts. 



In his dealings with the objects he studies and admires, the mature 

 museum historian's interests extend far beyond their aesthetic quali- 

 ties and beyond the tracing of technological developments per se. Like 

 the anthropologist, he is concerned with the broader implications of 

 objects — 'the roles they played in the cultures which produced them 

 and the social implications of technological change. He will continue 

 to employ a variety of techniques and to consult a wide range of 

 sources in his quest for answers to the problems of history. 




Research and Publications 

 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 



A number of major works by members of the department of science 

 and technology were published or are in press this year. Silvio A. 

 Bedini, in his Museum Bulletin Early American Scientific Instruments and 

 their Makers, brought together a wealth of facts and photographs that 

 has stimulated wide interest in this subject. As a result, enough new 

 information has been elicited to warrant a revised and enlarged edition, 

 on which he is working at present. Bedini also has assembled data and 

 illustrations documenting the scientific instrument as it appears in 

 American archeology. His purpose is a study of the scientific back- 

 ground of the exploration and early settlement of the North American 

 continent up to about 1700, for a book-length work completed in first 

 draft. The American Philosophical Society now has in press his 

 Mechanical Universe. 



In his Museum Bulletin Bark Canoes and Skin Boats of North America, 

 Howard I. Chapelle brought order and meaning to the inchoate 

 50-year accumulation of notes and portions of manuscript left by the 

 senior author and authority on canoes, Edwin Tappan Adney. This 

 monograph, carried to completion through the generosity of the 

 Mariner's Museum, which supported Chapelle in his work on the 

 Adney paper and his preparation of the numerous line drawings it 

 contains, represents a high order of cooperation in museum research, 

 and makes available information which otherwise might have remained 

 forever buried in museum archives. 



Sami K. Hamarneh's Bibliography on Medicine and Pharmacy in Medieval 

 Islam was published in Stuttgart by the Internationalen Gesellschaft fur 

 Geschichte der Pharmazie. And the Early Engineering Reminiscences 

 (1815-40) of George Escol Sellers, which Eugene S. Ferguson edited and 

 annotated while he was curator of engineering, appeared as a Museum 

 Bulletin. 



Three other book-length manuscripts are in press: Robert P. Mul- 

 thauf, The Origin of Chemistry, Uta C. Merzbach (with Garrett Birk- 

 hoff), Source Book in Classical Analysis, and John H. White, Jr., The 

 Cincinnati Locomotive Builders. And among the total of 35 publications 

 listed by the staff this year were a group of historical and analytical 

 articles on museums of science and technology making up the December 

 1964 issue of Technology and Culture (vol. 6, no. 1). 



A number of publications appeared as a result of research directed to 

 the documentation of collections. Donald H. Berkebile's study of the 

 Duryea automobile exploits a series of tape-recorded interviews with 



110 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 111 



the surviving inventor J. Frank Duryea, initiated and conducted here 

 in 1956 and 1957 by Edwin A. Battison. The Duryea automobile, 

 built in 1892-93, is the oldest in our collection and one of the first 

 gasoline-powered automobiles constructed in the United States. 

 Only through these interviews was it possible to restore missing details 

 of the vehicle. 



White's article on the Pioneer documents a locomotive built in 1851 

 by Seth Wilmarth in South Boston, Mass., and used primarily on the 

 Cumberland Valley Railroad in Pennsylvania. The machine was 

 given to the Museum in 1960 by the Pennsylvania Railroad Company. 



Bedini's study of an 18th-century astronomical clock deals with a 

 timepiece designed, in the words of its inventor, Father Francesco 

 Borghesi (1723-1802), "so that I might contemplate leisurely, both 

 during the day and in the night, the true face of the heavens and of the 

 seas unobscured by clouds, even though I had no astronomical equip- 

 ment." This clock, for which the faculty of eclipse prediction was also 

 claimed, was presented upon its completion in 1764 to the Empress 

 Maria Theresa of Austria. It was acquired by the Museum in 1958. 



An article by Edwin S. Battison on screw-thread cutting by the 

 master -screw method is based upon a study of one of the oldest extant 

 screw-cutting machines, signed "Manuel Wetschgi, Augspurg" and 

 dated from the end of the 17th century or the beginning of the 18th. 

 The machine was received from the Yale and Towne Company in 1959. 



Some other research papers published this year were inspired by 

 work in connection with exhibits. Chapelle's paper on Robert Fulton's 

 "Steam Battery" is one of a series of articles he has based on his design 

 reconstructions of historically important ships. The subject of the 

 article, the first steam-powered warship, was designed during the War 

 of 1812. The reconstruction of this historic ship is based upon plans 

 located by Chapelle in the Danish Royal Archives in Copenhagen. 



A paper on early electromagnetic instruments was published in 

 connection with the design of the exhibits in electricity by Museum 

 consultant Robert Chipman. The problem which inspired this paper 

 was the reconstruction for exhibit of "Schweigger's multiplier" of 

 1821, popularly regarded as the progenitor of the galvanometer. In 

 the course of this work Chipman found that several other instruments 

 of the same type were developed in the same year by Johann C. Pog- 

 gendorf and James Cumming. The consequence was an exhibit, in 

 which five reconstructed instruments are shown, and the present paper, 

 in which his findings are exposed. 



Robert M. Vogel has produced three papers in connection with the 

 design of the hall of civil engineering. His paper on the engineering 




112 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



contributions of Wendel Bollman arose in the dual problem of repre- 

 senting the work of Bollman in the exhibit of bridge building and of 

 evaluating an actual bridge, which had been brought to our attention 

 as the last surviving example of Bollman's work. Because of the 

 interesting and unique problems arising during the design and con- 

 struction of the hall, Vogel has presented the results of his experience 

 in two papers that describe the manner in which objects and docu- 

 ments are utilized to produce exhibits which will be both attractive to 

 a general audience and informative to the specialist. 



Walter F. Cannon, who spent part of 1962 and 1963 in London on a 

 National Science Foundation research grant for the study of science in 

 England in the 19th century, published the results in two papers, 

 "History in Depth: the Early Victorian Period," and "Scientists and 

 Broad Churchmen: an Early Victorian Intellectual Network." He is 

 now working on a biography of John Herschel. 



Hamarneh spent the period June 29 through October 17, 1964, in a 

 research tour often Middle Eastern countries and Spain. In addition 

 to assembling manuscript data for a history of medicine in medieval 

 Islam, he collected data for indexing the medical manuscripts in the 

 Zahiriyah National Library, Damascus. 



Edwin A. Battison arranged for and supervised the translation of two 

 Russian books through the Israel Program for Scientific Translations: 

 S. V. Tarasov, Technology of watch production (Moscow, 1956), and A. S. 

 Britkin and S. S. Vidonov's biography of the machine builder A. K. 

 Nartov. These translations, which have been completed, will be 

 published with introductions by Battison. 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 1964 through June 1965 



Adney, Edwin T., and Chapelle, Howard I. The bark canoes and 

 skin boats of North America. (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 230), 

 246 pp., 224 figs., 1964. 



Battison, Edwin A. Screw-thread cutting by the master-screw 

 method since 1480. Paper 37 in Contributions from the Museum of 

 History and Technology (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 240), 

 pp. 105-120, 23 figs., 1964. 



Bedini, Silvio A. Early American scientific instruments and their makers. 

 (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 231), 184 pp., 85 figs., 1964. 



-. The Borghesi astronomical clock in the Museum of History 



and Technology. Paper 35 in Contributions from the Museum of 

 History and Technology (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 240), pp. 

 29-76, 35 figs., 1964. 




U.S. Army communications satellite "Courier" (see p. 135) in newly opened 



hall of electricity. 



JHOHHHn 



A section of hall of electricity tracing development of early lighting systems 



and the telephone. 




Special exhibit of early modern scientific instruments from the collection 

 of David H. H. Felix of Philadelphia. Above: 17th- and 18th-century 

 Persian and Italian astrolabes and armillary spheres. Below: Gregor- 

 ian telescopes by Watson and Nairne, planetarium by Jones. 




American merchant marine hall was opened November 13, 1964. Its many 

 rigged models trace the evolution of American ships for over two centuries. 

 Above: model of Santa Maria, built in Museo Maritimo, Barcelona, as 

 reconstructed for New York World's Fair. Gift of Lawrence H. M. Vineburg. 

 (See p. 129.) 




Installing 12-ton piston assembly of Interborough Rapid Transit Co. engine 

 in the hall of heavy machinery. Engine from which it was removed was 

 one of eight that drove the generators supplying power to New York's first 

 subway, opened in 1904. These principal moving parts convey a sense of 

 the size of the reciprocating steam engine at the peak of its development, 

 before it was displaced by the steam turbine for this use. The piston is 

 7 feet in diameter and with its rod weighs 6 tons. The crosshead being 

 screwed on lower end of the piston rod, below, guides the rod when the 

 engine is in operation. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 113 



. Bramante e l'astrario del de' Dondi: Memorie della Acca- 



demia Patavina di Scienze. Letter e ed Arti (Padua, 1964), vol. 34, 

 pp. 286-290. 



. Johann Wolfgang Gelb of Ulm, 17th century clock and 



instrument maker. Physics (1964), vol. 6, pp. 245-258, 6 illustr. 

 . Time and light, the history of combined utensils for lighting 



and timekeeping. La Suissee Horlogere (internat. ed.), (Winter 

 1964), vol. 78, pp. 486-502; (Spring 1965), vol. 79, pp. 54-76. 

 — . A Renaissance lapidary lathe. Technology and Culture (Summer 

 1965), vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1-9, 10 pis. 



The evolution of science museums. Technology and Culture 



(Winter 1965), vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1-29, 2 figs. 

 Berkebile, Donald H. The 1893 Duryea automobile. Paper 34 in 



Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National 



Museum Bulletin 240), pp. 1-28, 29 figs., 1964. 

 Cannon, Walter F. History in depth: The early Victorian period. 



History of Science (1964), vol. 3, pp. 20-38. 

 . The role of the Cambridge movement in early 19th century 



science. Pp. 317-320 in Proceedings of the 70th International Congress 



of the History of Science. Paris: Hermann, 1964. 

 . The normative role of science in early Victorian thought. 



Journal of the History of Ideas (October-December 1964), vol. 25, 

 no. 4, pp. 487-502. 



. Scientists and broad churchmen: An early Victorian intel- 

 lectual network. Journal of British Studies (November 1964), vol.4, 

 no. 1, pp. 65-88. 



William Whewell, F.R.S., Part II: Contributions to science 



and learning. Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London (Decem- 

 ber 1964), vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 176-191. 



Chapelle, Howard I. Fulton's "Steam Battery": Blockship and 

 catamaran. Paper 39 in Contributions from the Museum of History 

 and Technology (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 240), pp. 137-176, 

 20 figs., 1964. 



Chipman, Robert A. The earliest electromagnetic instruments. 

 Paper 38 in Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology 

 (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 240), pp. 121-136, 8 figs., 1964. 



Farber, Eduard. History of phosphorus. Paper 40 in Contributions 

 from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National Museum 

 Bulletin 240), pp. 177-200, 23 figs., 1965. 



Ferguson, Eugene S., Edit. Early engineering reminiscences (1815-40) 

 of George Escol Sellers. (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 238), 

 203 pp., 83 figs., 1965. 




114 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 

 . Technical museums and international exhibition. Tech- 



nology and Culture (Winter 1965), vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 30-46. 

 Finn, Bernard S. The new technical museums. Museum News 



(November 1964), vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 22-26. 

 . The science museum today. Technology and Culture (Winter 



1965), vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 74-82. 

 Hamarneh, Sami K. Origin and functions of the hisbah system in 



Islam and its impact on the health professions. Sudhofs Archiv fur 



Geschichte der Medizin und der Naturwissenschqften (June 1964), vol. 48, 



no. 2, pp. 157-173. 

 ■ ■. The pharmacy museum at Krakow. American Journal of 



Hospital Pharmacy (June 1964), vol. 21, pp. 266-273, 12 illustr. 

 . Bibliography on medicine and pharmacy in medieval Islam. 



Internationalen G e sell schaft fur Geschichte der Pharmazie (Stuttgart, 1 964), 



n.s., vol. 25, 184 pp., 5 illustr. 

 . History of the division of medical sciences. Paper 43 in 



Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National 



Museum Bulletin 240), pp. 269-300, 24 figs., 1964. 

 . Medicine U.S.A. . . . Damascus international fair. Journal 



of the American Pharmaceutical Association (January 1965), n.s., vol. 5, 

 no. 1, pp. 28-29, 3 illustr. 



Surgical developments in medieval Arabic medicine. View- 



points (April 1965), vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 13-18, 6 illustr. 

 Lenzen, Victor F., and Multhauf, Robert P. Development of 



gravity pendulums in the 19th century. Paper 44 in Contributions 



from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National Museum 



Bulletin 240), pp. 301-348, 34 figs., 1965. 

 Multhauf, Robert P. The ancient natural philosopher as a chemist. 



Pp. 815-818 in Proceedings of the 10th International Congress of the 



History of Science. Paris: Hermann, 1964. 

 — . Engineering in Philadelphia, 1775-1825: Pennsylvania's 



contributions to the professions. Pp. 60-67 in Proceedings of the 



Second Rose Hill Seminar. 1 964. 



A museum case history. Technology and Culture (Winter 1965), 



vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 47-58. 

 Vogel, Robert M. Tunnel engineering, a museum treatment. 



Paper 41 in Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology 



(U.S. National Museum Bulletin 240), pp. 201-240, 44 figs., 1964. 

 . The engineering contributions of Wendel Bollman. Paper 36 



in Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. 



National Museum Bulletin 240), pp. 77-104, 24 figs., 1964. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 115 

 — . Smithsonian Institution opens a new hall of civil engineering. 



Civil Engineering (July 1964), pp. 84-85, 4 illustr. 



Assembling a new hall of civil engineering. Technology and 



Culture (Winter 1965), vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 59-73, 9 figs. 



White, John H. The "Pioneer" — light passenger locomotive of 1851. 

 Paper 42 in Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology 

 (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 240), pp. 241-268, 30 figs., 1964. 



. Alexander Latta as a locomotive designer. Bulletin Cincin- 

 nati Historical Society (April 1965), vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 128-135, 3 

 illustr. 



ARTS AND MANUFACTURES 



The new curator of agriculture and forest products, John T. Schle- 

 becker, took up his duties on June 14, 1965. Since 1959 associate 

 professor of history at Iowa State University, he is a member of the 

 executive committee of the Agricultural History Society and an im- 

 portant contributor to agricultural history studies. His History of 

 Dairying in the United States 1607-1964 is in press, and he has in progress 

 a much-needed general history of American agriculture. 



Paul V. Gardner spent six weeks in Europe examining 22 museum 

 and private collections for the purpose of verifying attributions and 

 preparing material for a definitive catalog of the unique collection of 

 18th-century European porcelains received from Dr. Hans Syz. In 

 the same connection and with the support and cooperation of the 

 Ceramica Stiftung of Basel, Switzerland, arrangements were made by 

 Dr. Syz for consultation in Washington with Dr. Rainer Ruckert, Ober- 

 konservator of the Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, Munich, Germany, 

 who spent the period April 19 through June 14, 1965, working with 

 Dr. Syz and the staff on special problems. 



Dr. Syz, who on April 27, 1965, was appointed an honorary fellow 

 of the Smithsonian Institution in recognition of his scholarly contri- 

 butions to the history of ceramics, continues to spend several days every 

 month on the project. 



Gardner, who has spent a major portion of his time revising the 

 script for the new hall of ceramics to include the Syz collection, has 

 nearly completed his biography of Frederick Carder, founder of Steuben 

 Glass Works. While in Europe, he visited London and the English 

 Midlands in search of material concerning Carder's early training and 

 experience. J. Jefferson Miller II was also heavily involved in the 

 revision of the hall of ceramics script to include recent important 




116 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



acquisitions in the Syz and Sutherland collections. He has contributed 

 extensively to the material for the Syz catalog. 



Jacob Kainen continued his study of the Dutch engraver Hendrick 

 Goltzius (1558-1617). 



Eugene Ostroff has developed a new technique to restore faded 

 photographic images through neutron irradiation. This work, de- 

 scribed on page 107, is the subject of a paper, "Early Fox Talbot 

 Photographs and Restoration by Neutron Irradiation," to be published 

 by the Journal of Photographic Science (London). Ostroff is continuing 

 his research into Talbot's experimental procedures. As part of his 

 investigation he examined four Talbot work diaries, and he uncovered 

 a group of Talbot's photographic experiments which has been brought 

 back to Washington for study. He also found what may prove to be 

 the earliest negatives on a transparent flexible-base material. These 

 photographs by Nevil S. Maskelyne were made, ca. 1860, on very thin 

 sheets of mica. At the invitation of Beaumont Newhall, director of 

 George Eastman House, Ostroff presented a paper describing this work 

 at the Symposium on the History of Photography and served as modera- 

 tor of a panel on the preservation of photographic materials. 



A project idea originated by Mr. Ostroff has resulted in a unique 

 photograph of the United States. This consists of an unbroken aerial 

 color photograph of the United States from the east to the west coast, 

 and, as a result, the longest panoramic picture in the world was pro- 

 duced. The project involved the cooperation of the United States 

 Navy, North American Aviation, Chicago Aerial Industries, and Gen- 

 eral Aniline and Film Corporation. 



Museum technician David Haberstitch, who joined the staff in 

 November 1964, has investigated the history of the section of photogra- 

 phy. His report concerning its establishment and early activities 

 reveals that the Smithsonian Institution was probably the first museum 

 in the United States to collect material related to the history of 

 photography. 



Philip W. Bishop worked on studies of early drilling methods and has 

 documented the procedure used by Colonel Drake in drilling the first 

 commercial oil well. A study of depreciation methods and their 

 influence on the process of innovation, especially during the period 

 1870-1914, is also in progress. 



Research concerned with the preparation of scripts for the halls of 

 nuclear energy, petroleum, iron and steel, and general manufacturing, 

 has required continuous consultation with the technical staffs of in- 

 dustrial firms and scientific laboratories and has resulted, incidentally, 

 in a number of substantial gifts to the Museum. John N. Hoffman, 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 117 



who entered on duty July 12, 1964, as associate curator of manufac- 

 tures and heavy industries, has developed a design for the hall of coal. 

 He has begun a study of the significance of the canal in the develop- 

 ment of Pennsylvania's coal resources in the early 1 9th century. 



Mrs. Grace Rogers Cooper continued her research on the spinning 

 wheel and its use in America from the Colonial era through the 19th 

 century. 



Rita J. Adrosko made progress in her work on American coverlets and 

 began two short-term projects: one on Jacquard-woven silk pictures 

 and Jacquard imitation tapestries, and the second on the use of natural 

 dyes in 18th- and 19th-century American textiles. 



Museum specialist Doris M. Bowman located a number of excellent 

 examples of early machine-made net of the late 18th and early 19th 

 century for her study of that article. Her catalog of the Museum's 

 excellent collection of sewing birds and similar clamping devices is also 

 further advanced. 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 1964 through June 1965 



Androsko, Rita J. Restoring an old loom. Handweaver and Craftsman 



(Summer 1964), vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 16-18, 4 figs. 

 Cooper, Grace R. Sewing machines, unusual styles of the 1850's. 



Spinning Wheel (a national magazine about antiques), (July- August 



1964), vol. 20, nos. 7-8, pp. 20-21, 5 figs., cover illustr. 



. John Kay. In vol. 13 of Encyclopedia Britannica, 1965. 



. Moire. In vol. 15 of Encyclopedia Britannica, 1965. 



Miller, J. Jefferson ii. Transfer printed English earthenware for 



the American market. Apollo (January 1965), n.s., vol. 81, no. 35, 



pp. 46-50. 

 . Early Meissen tea canisters. Country Life (Feb. 4, 1965), 



vol. 130, no. 3544, pp. 222-223. 

 . Transfer printed American scenes on Staffordshire wares. 



In Annual Catalog of the Johns Hopkins Hospital Carriage House Antique 



Show (May 1965). 



CIVIL HISTORY 



Documentation of an important and extensive collection of over 

 350 examples of American folk art, the Eleanor and Mabel Van 

 Alstyne collection, which came to the museum in December, partly 




118 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



by gift and partly on loan from Mrs. Fred Dana Marsh of Woodstock, 

 N.Y., was undertaken by Peter Welsh and Anne Castrodale. This 

 collection includes rare examples of the late 1 8th century and extends 

 to the early 20th century. Carved animals from carousels, circus 

 wagon figures, and shop and tavern signs abound in the group, which 

 also includes paintings, calligraphy, weathervanes, ships' ornaments, 

 and small carved birds and animals. 



The original interior appearance and furnishings of the Smithsonian 

 building have been the subject of an extensive research project ini- 

 tiated by Richard H. Howland. In this he has been assisted by 

 Rodris C. Roth. This nationally significant architectural landmark 

 was designed in the 1840's by the noted architect James Ren wick, 

 and the long-range plan of renovation is intended to produce an 

 interior that is in harmony with the exterior, and yet can serve use- 

 fully as offices and exhibit areas. The research is nearing completion : 

 renovation of the Regents' room and the Secretary's offices has been 

 completed to reflect the period of the third quarter of the 19th century, 

 the epoch of Joseph Henry's secretaryship; and considerable work 

 has already been accomplished on the renovation of the great hall, 

 which will serve as an exhibit area and visitors' lounge. Welsh has 

 collaborated in choosing for it exhibits that reflect the significant 

 research accomplishments of the museums and major bureaus of the 

 Smithsonian. 



Museum specialist Jay Scott Odell made two field trips to the south- 

 ern Appalachian mountain country, primarily in Virginia and North 

 Carolina, to search for American folk instruments for the collections 

 and to record the present traditions of musical performance in those 

 areas. 



Concerned with interrelated objectives of research and exhibits, 

 C. Malcolm Watkins and Mrs. Joan Pearson Watkins, research col- 

 laborator, during October sought a post-Gold Rush period ranch 

 house kitchen in northern California to install in the Museum's hall of 

 everyday life in the American past. One was found in a long-aban- 

 doned house, built about 1862 at the foot of Mount Shasta, which 

 exemplifies both the transfer of traditional Eastern folk concepts of 

 farm-house architecture and the adaptation of design to new Western 

 conditions. With the cooperation of George H. Watson, specialist 

 in restoration of old structures, the house was thoroughly analyzed 

 and measured, and its plans were drawn. Mrs. Watkins made a 

 detailed photographic study of it, and interviewed descendants of the 

 builder, a gold-miner-turned-rancher named George Washington 

 Arbaugh, and others. 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS — ARTS AND MANUFACTURES 119 



Mr. Watkins is also engaged in research relative to a frame "salt 

 box" house built in 1853 in Half Moon Bay, San Mateo County. 

 Embodying ideas from 18th- and early 19th-century Eastern proto- 

 types as well as adaptive features typical of California, the house is 

 rich in implications of cultural transfer and cultural change. 



Mrs. Elvira Clain-Stefanelli published her Select Numismatic Bibli- 

 ography, a compilation of 4962 titles, arranged by subject, that sum- 

 marize research in numismatics during the past two centuries, including 

 the study of medals and decorations, and a history of prices and related 

 economic and historical problems. 



Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli, in addition to his publications, gave two 

 lectures, "The Future of United States Coinage" and "Historical 

 Notes on Some Coinage Metals," that attracted wide press coverage 

 because their themes touched on the impending shortage of silver for 

 United States coinage. 



Publications by the Staff 

 July 1964 through June 1965 



Borthwick, Doris E. Outfitting the United States Exploring Expe- 

 dition: Lieutenant Charles Wilkes' European assignment, August- 

 November, 1836. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 

 (June 1965), vol. 109, no. 3, pp. 159-172, 7 illustr. 



Clain-Stefanelli, Elvira. Medallic art at the Cleveland convention: 

 Exposition des medailles a la convention de Cleveland. Medailles 

 (Paris, December 1964), vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 2-5. 



. Select numismatic bibliography, xiv, 406 pp. New York: 



Stack's, 1965. 



Clain-Stefanelli, Vladimir. A new quarter shekel of the first year 

 of the Jewish war. Israel Numismatic Journal (1964), vol. 2, p. 7, 

 pi. 6. 



. The future of United States coinage. Numismatist (1964), 



pp. 1673-1675; (1965), pp. 39-41. 



. The silver crisis in the United States coinage system. Central 



Economic Letter (Central National Bank of Cleveland, 1965), vol. 4, 

 pp. 1-4. 



Collins, Herbert R. Political campaign torches. Paper 45 in 

 Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National 

 Museum Bulletin 241), pp. 1-44, 1964. 



. Red Cross ambulance of 1898. Paper 50 in Contributions 



from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National Museum 

 Bulletin 241), pp. 165-176, 1965. 




120 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



Hoover, Cynthia Adams. The slide trumpet of the nineteenth 

 century. Brass Quarterly (Summer 1963), vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 159-178, 

 7 pis. 



Howland, Richard H., and Forbes, John D. The society of archi- 

 tectural historians. Pp. 77-81 in Report of the Commission on the 

 Humanities. New York: American Council of Learned Societies, 

 1964. 



. What is past is prologue. Museum News (November 1964), 



vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 34-39. 



. Echoes of a gilded epoch. Arts in Virginia (Fall 1964), 



vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 2-9. 

 Klapthor, Margaret Brown. Southern Maryland during the War 



of 1812. The Record (Quarterly Journal of the Historical Society 



of Charles City, Md., 1965), pp. 1-6. 

 (ed. of historical text). The First Ladies' Cook Book: Favorite 



Recipes of all the Presidents of the United States. Pp. 1-224. New 



York, 1965. 

 Melder, Keith E. Bryan the campaigner. Paper 46 in Contributions 

 from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National Museum 



Bulletin 241), pp. 45-80, 1965. 

 . The beginnings of the women's rights movement in the 



United States, 1800-1840. 500 pp. University Microfilms, 1965. 

 Murray, Anne W. The elegant handkerchief. Antiques (June 1965), 



pp. 720-723. 

 Roth, Rodris. The colonial revival and "centennial furniture." 



Art Quarterly (1964), vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 57-81, 24 figs. 

 Scheele, Carl H. A new home for the Smithsonian's philatelic and 



postal history collections. Congress Book (Thirtieth American 



Philatelic Congress, 1964), pp. 11-14, 1 pi. 

 ■ . A philatelic new look at the Smithsonian. Society of Philatelic 



Americans Journal (September 1964), vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 13-18, 



3 figs. 



Philately and postal history at the Smithsonian Institution. 



Scandinavian Scribe (March 1965), vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 67-71. 

 Washburn, Wilcomb E. A Roman sarcophagus in a museum of 



American history. Curator (December 1964), vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 



296-299. 



. [Introduction to facsimile edition of] History of the Indians of 



Connecticut from the earliest known period to 1850, by John W. De Forest, 

 Archon Books, 1964 [20 pp.]. 

 . Law and authority in Colonial Virginia. Pp. 116-135 in 



Law and Authority in Colonial America, edit. George A. Billias; Barre, 



Mass., 1965. 




. 



From this two-room frame house, built about 1862 by George Washington 

 Arbaugh in Siskiyou County, California, came the western frontier ranch 

 kitchen, shown below, which has been installed in the hall of everyday life 

 in the American past. (See pp. 118, 138.) 




This faded photograph of a table setting, taken circa 1841 by W. H. F. Talbot 

 of England, who in 1839 invented the photographic negative, was exposed 

 to radiation in the pile at Brookhaven National Laboratories. 



When the treated original was then placed in contact with x-ray film, the 

 radioactive isotopes of some image silver produced this picture. (See pp. 

 107-108.) 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS ARMED FORCES HISTORY 121 



— . Natural light and the museum of the future. AIA Journal 

 (January 1965), vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 60-64. 

 — . The museum and Joseph Henry. Curator (May 1965), vol. 8, 



no. 1, pp. 35-54. 



Welsh, Peter C. Tanning in the United States to 1850: A brief history. 

 (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 242), 108 pp., 28 illustr., 1964. 



. The decorative appeal of hand tools. Antiques (February 



1965), vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 204-207, 15 illustr. 



. United States patents, 1790 to 1870. Paper 48 in Contribu- 

 tions from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National 

 Museum Bulletin 241), pp. 109-152, 57 illustr., 1965. 



ARMED FORCES HISTORY 



Underwater exploration, with its related activities, continued to be 

 a major element in the program of Mendel L. Peterson. Research on 

 the techniques of surveying and measuring underwater remains pro- 

 ceeded on Bermuda sites. Three new instruments for measuring in 

 plan and elevation were tested on the timber remains of a ship believed 

 to be Spanish of the late 16th century. Their use is described in detail 

 and illustrated on pages 105-106. 



Research on techniques of preserving organic materials recovered 

 from underwater sites was continued with substantial results by museum 

 specialist Alan B. Albright. The following investigations were carried 

 on: 



1. The devising of a rapid method of dehydration, using heated 

 alcohol. 



2. Tests using acetone as a dehydration agent. 



3. Experiments using various heat ranges in attempting to speed 

 up the penetration of PEG 4000 in dehydrated wood. 



4. Experiments in the use of PEG 6000 in the place of PEG 4000 

 where the greater inherent strength of the higher weight PEG would 

 be useful in restoring very fragile organic objects. 



5. Research into the use of fiberglass resin as a wood preservative. 



6. Continued research in the problem of the preservation of iron 

 recovered from under water; research into the use of high temperatures 

 and wax impregnation under vacuum in an attempt to eliminate the 

 long process involved in the use of electro-chemical baths. 



7. Restoration of ceramic materials. 



The results of these researches were published by Peterson this year in 

 his History under the Sea: A Handbook for Underwater Exploration. 



789-427—66 18 




122 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



In the division of military history Edgar M. Howell and museum 

 specialist Donald E. Kloster completed in draft the first volume of a 

 comprehensive descriptive and critical catalog on United States Army 

 dress to include uniforms, headgear, and footwear. In connection 

 with this work, they actively assisted the Department of the Army in 

 research which resulted in the adoption of a new-type headgear. 

 Howell continued his work on contemporary graphics relating to the 

 role of the Army in the opening of the West, publishing a second 

 monograph on the subject. Kloster completed as partial requirement 

 for the degree of master of arts a thesis, "The United States Uniform 

 from 1832 to 1851, from Romance to Practicality." 



In the division of naval history Philip K. Lundeberg broadened his 

 long-range study of modern commerce warfare, completing a survey of 

 "The Impact of Undersea Warfare upon Allied Strategy during the 

 First World War," which he presented at the annual convention of the 

 American Historical Association. Delivered at a session sponsored by 

 the American Military Institute on the influence of technology upon 

 strategy in World War I, this paper re-examined the maritime con- 

 flict in terms of the downfall of Imperial Russia, as well as Imperial 

 Germany. Notwithstanding the fact that undersea operations utterly 

 failed Germany, their most ardent protagonist during the First World 

 War, submarine and mine warfare exerted a profound influence upon 

 Great Britain's peripheral strategy, repeatedly frustrating her attempts 

 to achieve effective maritime collaboration with her isolated eastern 

 ally. 



Melvin H. Jackson continued his study of naval muzzle-loading 

 ordnance of the 18th and 19th centuries. A field trip to Europe, which 

 covered the coastal region from Sweden to Spain and included southern 

 France and England, produced from naval museums and archives 

 basic information which will enrich material contained in a manu- 

 script on muzzle-loading ordnance prepared by the late Colonel 

 Carey Tucker. At the Legersmuseum in Leiden, a series of 50 draw- 

 ings concerning brass cannon founding in the 18th century was 

 brought to Jackson's attention. These drawings by Pieter Verbruggen 

 (who, with his father Jan, was master-founder of the Royal Brass 

 Foundry at Woolwich, England, from 1770 to 1800) proved of such 

 interest, from both the point of view of ordnance and the history of 

 technology, that plans are under way for their publication. Jackson's 

 manuscript "Caribbean Vortex, 1793-1801," a maritime history of the 

 Wars of the French Revolution in the Caribbean was completed and is 

 under consideration by a university press. His lecture at the Walter 

 Library, University of Minnesota, Salt, Sugar and Slaves'. The Dutch in 




RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS ARMED FORCES HISTORY 123 



the Caribbean, was published by the Associates of the James Ford Bell 

 Collection. 



Publications by the Staff 



July 1964 through June 1965 



Goins, Graddock R., Jr., Lorenzoni repeating system. P. 151 in 



Encyclopedia of Firearms, 1964. 

 ■ — ■. John H. Hall and Hall breech-loading arms. Pp. 157-158 in 



Encyclopedia of Firearms, 1964. 



— ■ . Edward Maynard. P. 218 in Encyclopedia of Firearms, 1964. 



— — — . Pump action. Pp. 249-250 in Encyclopedia of Firearms, 1964. 

 — — ■ — . Repeating arms. Pp. 254-256 in Encyclopedia of Firearms, 



1964. 

 Howell, Edgar M. A special artist in the Indian Wars. Montana, 



the Magazine of Western History (1965), vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 2-23, 23 pis. 

 Jackson, Melvin H. Salt, sugar and slaves: The Dutch in the Caribbean 



(No. 2 in James Ford Bell Lectures). Minnesota: Associates of the 



James Ford Bell Collection, 1965. 

 Peterson, Mendel L. History under the sea: A handbook for underwater 



exploration. Smithsonian Publication 4538, 108 pp., illustr., 1965. 

 ■. Preservation of material recovered from water. 20 pp. Washing- 

 ton: Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, Division of Naval 



History, 1965. 

 — ■ ■. The Spanish plate fleet. Pp. 162-169 in Proceedings of the 



Fifth Annual Convention of the Underwater Society of America. Mexico 

 City, 1965. 




The Collections 

 CARE AND CONSERVATION 



SPECIMENS ACCESSIONED, IDENTIFIED, AND DISTRIBUTED— 

 FISCAL YEAR 1965 



Departments 



Science and Tech- 

 nology .... 



Arts and Manu- 

 factures .... 



Civil History . . 



Armed Forces His- 

 tory 



Total . . . 



Accessions 

 (transac- 

 tions) 

 1965 

 (new) 



254 



266 



744 



128 



1,392 



Trans- Lent for 

 J erred to study to 

 Exchanged other Gov- investigators 

 Received with other ernment and other Specimens 

 on loan institutions agencies institutions identified 



2 

 1,393 



1,398 







334 

 50 



92 



181 

 1,460 



22 



112 



1,150 

 145,834 



950 



384 1,755 148,046 



SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 



The receipt of a large collection often poses a problem in cataloging 

 and documentation. Such collections sometimes come to the Museum 

 because their processing has been beyond the capacity of other museums 

 or private collectors. The extant records may be incomplete, and 

 their rehabilitation and full documentation may require years. Three 

 large collections were handled this year: the Hirsch collection of water 

 meters (96 items), the Read collection of phonographs (93 items), and 

 the Arthur collection of timekeeping devices (about 2600 items). 

 Processing them called for a special effort in which summer interns and 

 outside consultants assisted Deborah Mills in their cataloging. 



A program to make operable the majority of machines to be exhibited 

 in the hall of heavy machinery was undertaken by William Henson 

 and Marion Jarboe. The latter also began occasional demonstrations 

 of the machine tools in the hall of tools. An alarm system devised by 

 Elliot Sivo witch and Roy LaRoche of the division of electricity has 

 been installed experimentally for the protection of several objects not 

 cased. 



ARTS AND MANUFACTURES 



A new technique for restoring faded photographs through neutron 

 irradiation was devised by Eugene Ostroff (it is described in detail on 

 page 107). A small selection of the most valuable photographs in the 

 collection is now being treated by this method. 



124 




THE COLLECTIONS CARE AND CONSERVATION 125 



Museum specialist Elliott Hawkins continued a long-range program 

 of increasing the collections of periodicals, monographs, and books 

 devoted to motion pictures. 



The cleaning of George Washington's headquarters tent, a major 

 conservation project, was jointly undertaken by the divisions of textiles 

 and military history. With plans for its permanent exhibition, this 

 Revolutionary War tent, which had been carefully stored for 75 years 

 in the military history collections, was carefully examined. It was 

 found basically in sturdy condition, but the metal hooks and eyes 

 used to fasten the sidewalls to the top had rusted and had stained and 

 deterioriated the linen fabric, leaving it in an acid condition. The 

 tent was also mud stained and generally dusty. After consultation, it 

 was decided that for safe preservation, the tent, of single ply, z-twist, 

 plain-woven, unbleached linen, should be cleaned to neutralize the 

 acid condition which is very harmful to cellulose fibers. 



Stretched out, the sidewalls measured 82 / 3 // long and between 6 '4" 

 and 5'iy 4 " high. The top measured 34' by 20 '8" and was edged 

 with a valance trimmed in a narrow woven red wool-twill tape of 2-ply, 

 s-twist worsted yarns. Before work could be started, the 171 rusty 

 hooks and eyes were removed to prevent further deterioration from 

 rust. The tent parts were then protected with fiberglass screening 

 and carefully vacuumed with a hand-type, low-suction vacuum cleaner 

 to remove all loose dust and dirt. 



Although neutralized distilled water would have been preferred, 

 the quantity required made it more economical to use de-ionized water 

 with a non-ionic detergent. To handle the two portions of the tent, 

 a wooden frame ll'x7' by 1" deep was constructed to support a con- 

 tainer made of two layers of polyethylene sheets that could be clamped 

 and undamped to the frame as required. 



The sidewall portion was folded into eight layers, placed on fiber- 

 glass screening of suitable size, and lowered into a bath of 1 80 gallons of 

 neutral, de-ionized water at room temperature, where it was soaked 

 for 65 hours. This removed the large water-mark stains on the tent 

 and some of the soil. Supported on the screen, the sidewall was re- 

 moved from the bath, the soiled water pumped out, and the dirt film 

 was wiped off and rinsed from the polyethylene bath liner, after which 

 the bath was refilled with a wash solution consisting of % oz. of non- 

 ionic detergent to each gallon of de-ionized water, the detergent 

 first having been dissolved in beakers of water over low heat. When 

 the entire bath was at room temperature, the sidewall was lowered into 

 it and remained there for 3% hours. The only mechanical action used 

 was a gentle pushing and smoothing movement by hand to eliminate 

 air bubbles that formed between the layers of tent. After being re- 




126 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



moved from the detergent solution, the sidewall was rinsed four times. 

 Each rinse solution was tested for pH, and the final reading was a very- 

 satisfactory 7.1. 



After removal from the final rinse, the sidewall was allowed to drain 

 on the screening until excess moisture was eliminated. It was then 

 laid on a polyethylene film placed over a terrazzo floor and carefully 

 smoothed flat while damp. The linen adhered to the plastic and 

 dried smooth overnight. White absorbent towels, laid along the full 

 length, took up excess moisture and protected the linen from dust. 

 It was then rolled until the case was completed for exhibition. 



The top was treated in the same manner, except that, because of the 

 shaped construction, it was dried on a frame stretched with fiberglass 

 screening and supported two feet from the ground to allow a good 

 circulation of air and to keep drying time at a minimum. At installa- 

 tion it was lightly sprayed with distilled water and smoothed to the 

 shape of its contour support structure. 



The entire project, under the general supervision of Mrs. Grace R. 

 Cooper, was carried out by museum technician Maureen Collins of the 

 textile laboratory, assisted by museum technician Lois Vann of the 

 division of textiles and museum specialist Donald Kloster of the division 

 of military history. 



CIVIL HISTORY 



A new, well-equipped conservation laboratory designed by museum 

 specialist Jay Scott Odell, has facilities for the restoration of all types 

 of musical instruments and includes a "go-bar deck," an adaptation of 

 an 18th-century device for gluing bridges on harpsichord sound boards. 

 With the completion of this laboratory, most of the restoration work 

 can now be done at the museum under controlled conditions. Once 

 the collections are in order, this shop will also be used for experiments 

 in the building of modern reproductions of medieval, Renaissance, and 

 Baroque instruments. 



Specially designed metal storage racks, installed for keyboard instru- 

 ments, are cantilevered to allow for storage flexibility. The keyboard 

 instruments, with their legs removed, are mounted on wooden pallets 

 and lifted into place by a fork-lift truck. This system permits ready 

 examination of the instruments, and is efficient enough to store a major 

 portion of the Smithsonian's collection of more than 200 keyboard 

 instruments. 



Under the guidance of museum technician Mrs. Betty J. Walters, 

 considerable progress was made in assembling data on certain phases 

 of the collections for use in a Termatrex data-retrieval system. Ulti- 

 mately, it is expected that major portions of the collections, with their 




THE COLLECTIONS — GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 127 



associated catalog records, can be made useful in a variety of ways 

 hitherto impossible by visual or manual means. 



More than 95 percent of the entire reference collection of philatelic 

 items was moved from the old Arts and Industries building into the 

 new museum within two days, and the move was completed without 

 damage to any of the 9,800,000 specimens handled. 



ARMED FORCES HISTORY 



Experiments were begun to test the effectiveness of a commercial 

 rust-inhibitor formula C.R.C., which appears to be most effective and 

 requires less work than is presently required in applying a wax formula. 



GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 



SPECIMENS IN THE NATIONAL COLLECTIONS MAY 31, 1965 



Department of Science and Technology 84, 405 



Physical Sciences 4,453 



Mechanical and Civil Engineering 11,091 



Electricity 7, 333 



Transportation 25, 783 



Medical Sciences 35, 745 



Department of Arts and Manufactures 149, 808 



Textiles 35,172 



Ceramics and Glass 17, 157 



Graphic Arts 51,714 



Manufactures and Heavy Industries 35, 214 



Agriculture and Forest Products 10, 551 



Department of Civil History 10,196,735 



Political History 48,350 



Cultural History 23,688 



Philately and Postal History 9, 944, 937 



Numismatics 179, 760 



Department of Armed Forces History 53, 303 



Military 41,249 



Naval 12,054 



Total 10,484,251 



SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 



A number of notable collections were acquired this year by the 

 department of science and technology. Among them are the Arthur 

 collection of timekeeping devices, the Read collection of phonographs, 

 a rare early American woodworking shop, a collection of wood- 

 carvings, and the "first generation" of communications satellites. 




128 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



The first, assembled by James Arthur, who also endowed the Arthur 

 lectures at the Smithsonian, is especially remarkable for Japanese 

 and early American clocks and for American watches. It was re- 

 ceived on permanent loan from New York University. The Read 

 collection was received from Oliver Read, co-author of the book 

 From Tinfoil to Stereo. It contains such rarities as the Edison coin- 

 operated phonograph of 1897, and it more than doubles the size of 

 the Museum's phonograph collection. The woodworking shop, from 

 Mansfield, Conn., contains an up-and-down sawmill, water turbines, 

 and, among other machines, one of the earliest extant lathes with a 

 completely intact automatic feed. It also contains a very important 

 gage attachment for woodturning with handtools, which allows 

 "automatic" sizing of the work. 



The wood carvings, gift of Joel Barlow, include a number of ship 

 half-models, which augment our already strong collection, and also 

 decorative ship carvings and figureheads, of which we have heretofore 

 had very few. And in a highly successful example of systematic 

 collecting of pioneer apparatus in a particular field, Bernard S. Finn 

 succeeded in acquiring from five different donors, for a special ex- 

 hibition of "communications in space," actual examples of the first 

 eight communication satellites. 



Among the important individual specimens added to the collections 

 were the following: 



A Chinese monumental equatorial sundial of the Ming dynasty. 

 This instrument, 52 inches in height, is the only sundial of its type 

 known to exist in the Western world. Its construction is of native 

 copper gilded by the mercury process. The 25-inch dial is designed 

 to be read on both sides, with the shadow marking the hours on the 

 upper side during the summer months and on the lower side during 

 the winter. 



The second ammonia-beam maser apparatus, designed in 1955 

 by Charles Townes of Columbia University, a joint gift of Townes 

 and the University. The maser is an outstanding development of 

 20th-century quantum physics for which the inventor shared the Nobel 

 Prize in 1964. 



An early American-made Schmidt telescope, built in the 1930's 

 by C. A. and H. A. Lower of San Diego, Calif., was received from 

 San Diego State College. 



A White Motor bus of 1917, received from the Baltimore Transit 

 Co., the first commercial transit motor vehicle in the collection. 



A model, to the scale of 1" equals 1', of the famed "Louisville 

 pumping engine," one of the masterpieces of Erasmus D. Leavitt, 

 builder of the most efficient steam engines of the 19th century. Before 




Washing George Washington's headquarters tent (see pp. 125-126). Here 

 the 82-foot sidewall is being rinsed. 



Sidewall is carefully smoothed onto polyethylene film for drying and is covered 

 with towels to absorb excess moisture and to protect it from dust. 





Indian silhouette weathervane, one of many examples of American folk art in 

 the Eleanor and Mabel Van Alstyne collection, gift of Mrs. Fred Dana 

 Marsh. 



Chinese equatorial sundial, recently obtained for the national collections 

 (see p. 128), is 52 inches high and measures 48 inches in overall length. 

 The diameter of the dial is 25 inches. It is constructed of almost pure 

 native copper assembled with wide dovetail joints, hammered into surface 

 smoothness from the interior, and soldered. The decorative motifs are 

 chiseled and engraved from the outside, and the whole is covered with 

 heavy fire gilt. The dial is read on both sides — on the upper surface during 

 summer and on the lower surface during winter. 




Early 1 5-passenger motor bus with solid-rubber tires, gift of Baltimore Transit 

 Co., was built in 1917 by the White Motor Company. The body was made 

 by J. G. Brill, the famous streetcar builder. Below: Bow view of model of 

 the United States revenue cutter Bear, as she appeared in the late 19th 

 century, acquired for new hall of naval history. 



. 




THE COLLECTIONS — GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 129 



the original engine was scrapped jin 1 962, this fully operating model 

 was begun by the builder and donor, Mr. Harry H. Catching of 

 Lexington, Ky. 



A model of Columbus' flagship of 1492, Santa Maria, constructed 

 at the Museo Maritimo in Barcelona, under the supervision of its 

 director, Jose Ma. Martinez-Hidalgo y Teran. This model, presented 

 by Lawrence H. M. Vine burgh, was built in connection with the 

 full -sized reconstruction of the Santa Maria for the New York World's 

 Fair. The project was directed by Sr. Hidalgo, as the leading authority 

 on the ships of Columbus, with the advisory participation of Howard I. 

 Chapelle. 



ARTS AND MANUFACTURES 



With the cooperation of the Fine Hardwoods Association and 

 specialist manufacturers some 200 panels of foreign and domestic 

 woods were presented for incorporation into a decorative screen, 

 designed by the exhibits laboratory, that will provide the hall of forest 

 products with an encyclopedic account of available timbers. For the 

 agriculture collections a fine contemporary model of the first field 

 pick-up hay baler (1932) was received from Mr. Leslie R. Tallman, 

 son of the inventor. 



The ceramics collections continued to receive support from previous 

 donors, notably Mrs. William A. Sutherland and Robert H. McCauley. 

 Dr. Hans Syz formally donated 16 extremely valuable items of that 

 part of his collection still on loan to the Museum. Other major gifts 

 were those of Dr. Lloyd Hawes who presented 23 pieces of 18th- 

 century English earthenware, including some excellent examples of 

 polychrome salt glaze; and of Mr. and Mrs. Edward M. Pfiueger, 

 whose gift included an extremely fine pair of Chinoiserie busts from 

 the Bow Factory (ca. 1755). 



The Holmegaards Glasvaerk of Denmark and the N. V. Koninklijke 

 Nederlandsche Glasfabriek "Leerdam" of Holland added to the 

 collections of contemporary glass some fine pieces which it was possible 

 to include in the present exhibition area. Ray Winfield Smith's 

 collection of ancient glass was lent to the Museum for installation in 

 the glass gallery in September 1964, and during the year ten pieces 

 from this collection were acquired. 



A splendid set of 31 Venetian views by Antonio Canal (1697-1768), 

 commonly called Canaletto, constituting the entire body of his etchings, 

 was received from Mrs. Francis P. Garvan of New York City. Among 

 other important acquisitions were outstanding examples of German 

 Expressionist printmaking including work by Max Beckmann, Ernst 



789-427—66 20 




130 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



Ludwig Kirchner, Erich Heckel, Franz Marc, and Max Pechstein; 

 one of the earliest known lithographs Landscape with Men in Armor 

 (1803) by Joseph Fischer; and the aquatint Green Clown with Boy 

 by Georges Rouault. American contributions were represented by the 

 etching Woolworth Tower (1913) by the pioneer modernist John Marin, 

 and the color woodcut View from Taormina by Carol Summers. 



The A. B. Dick Company of Chicago presented an early model (ca. 

 1885) of the Edison mimeograph, an important pioneer example of 

 duplicating equipment. 



To the collection of historic photographic equipment were added 

 the first Polaroid-Land camera to be produced (1948); a prototype of 

 the first Leica camera, invented by Osker Barnack (1912) and marketed 

 by Leitz in 1924; and two examples of the Technicolor Corporation's 

 3-step color motion-picture cameras associated with the introduction 

 of high-quality color motion pictures in 1930. 



Colonel and Mrs. Burnett Brown of Lacock Abbey, Wiltshire, the 

 home of W. H. F. Talbot, gave a rare copy of Part VI (April 1846) 

 of the latter's publication The Pencil of Nature, the first book to be 

 illustrated with photographs. 



Dr. Zoltan Bay of the National Bureau of Standards deposited the 

 original electron-multiplier developed by him (1938) at the Institute 

 of Atomic Physics of the Royal Hungarian University, Budapest. 

 This apparatus, to be included in the hall of nuclear energy, repre- 

 sented a turning point in the development of instruments for counting 

 elementary particles. An equally critical stage in the study of nuclear 

 physics is represented by the million-volt Van de Graaff accelerator 

 (1931) given by Merle A. Tuve of the Carnegie Institution's Division 

 of Terrestrial Magnetism. Among other achievements, this machine 

 brought protons close enough to atomic nuclei to overwhelm the inher- 

 ent electrical repulsion, and so demonstrated the existence of the short- 

 range nuclear force. Pioneer work among elementary particles was 

 commemorated by Professor Conversi of the Universita degli Studi, 

 Rome, Italy, in the form of a replica of his experiment with Piccioni 

 and others (1941-1943) demonstrating the noncapture of mu mesons. 



A number of substantial gifts were received from industry for the 

 iron and steel hall. Ford Motor Company Fund and U.S. Steel 

 Corporation are supporting the construction of large models of a 

 foundry and of an integrated steel plant, respectively. The Allis- 

 Chalmers Company gave a model of a pelletizing plant, Bausch and 

 Lomb a bench metallograph, and the Tinius Olsen Company a display 

 of hardness-testing equipment. 



The coal industry contributed a variety of miners' tools, while a 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 131 



further portion of a collection of tinware, previously on loan, was 

 converted to a gift. 



Plans for the hall of petroleum were virtually completed by agreement 

 with the engineers of various firms for demonstrations of oil production 

 techniques to accompany the actual machinery. A group of oil men 

 in and around Tulsa, Okla., have contributed, through Mr. W. H. 

 Helmerich, a 57-foot mural describing the oil industry. This mural, 

 now being painted by Mr. Delbert Jackson, staff artist of the Pan 

 American Petroleum Corporation, will embellish the entrance to the 

 hall of petroleum. 



The Austrian Imperial bridal veil, an outstanding example of Brus- 

 sels Point de Gaze lace, was presented to the textile collections by Mrs. 

 Marjorie Merriweather Post. The veil was worn by Princess Stephanie 

 of Belgium for her wedding to Crown Prince Rudolph in 1881. Scat- 

 tered over the Brussels needlepoint reseau, sheerest of all lace grounds, 

 are garlands and sprays of ferns and flowers of many kinds. The crown 

 of the veil is powdered with tiny rosebuds, while the double-headed 

 eagle of Austria dominates the center back. The arms of the provinces 

 of Austria and Belgium form the border, with the arms of Belgium at 

 the center. 



Also added to the textile collections were nine fragments of Egyptian 

 tapestry-woven fabric, woven between the third and eighth centuries, 

 A.D. These interesting examples of early tapestry-weaving technique 

 will be incorporated into the expanded area of tapestry weaving in 

 the new textile hall. 



CIVIL HISTORY 



The collections were enriched in a variety of ways. The Honorable 

 David K. E. Bruce presented numerous objects of French and English 

 decorative arts and furniture. Mrs. Gustave A. Murman gave the 

 woodwork of a Federal-period parlor from a house in Martha's Vine- 

 yard, Mass. This room is remarkable for the primitive landscape 

 painting that appears in an oval cartouche in the rectangular over- 

 mantel panel above the fireplace. The room, with contemporary 

 furniture, will be installed in the hall of everyday life in the American 

 past. It was moved from its site by the Museum's restoration specialist, 

 George H. Watson. The Eleanor and Mabel Van Alstyne collection, 

 containing outstanding examples of folk art of the United States, was 

 given by Mrs. Fred Dana Marsh. In addition to the kitchen of the 

 George Washington Arbaugh ranch house in Siskiyou County, Calif., 

 discovery of which is described on pages 118 and 138, the collections of 




132 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



Californiana were greatly enriched by a unique figure of a hunter, 

 carved of redwood, holding a gun in one hand and a partridge in the 

 other. The wheeled platform on which it stands and its costume both 

 confirm the traditional belief that it was carved, in about 1850, as a 

 sign for a gun shop in San Jose. 



A handsome bass viola da gamba was acquired for the collection of 

 musical instruments. This fine instrument, made in London, 1718, by 

 Barak Norman, who is regarded as the Stradivarius of the viola da 

 gamba, is richly carved with floral designs and an elaborate monogram 

 on the back and sides. A carved male figure appears on the head. In 

 excellent condition, this instrument, when not in use in Museum 

 concerts, will be on exhibit. 



At a ceremony on December 18, 1964, Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson 

 contributed to the First Ladies collection a most significant addition, 

 the satin evening dress worn by her at a state dinner at the White 

 House in December 1964. Presented by Mrs. Gladys P. Lehmann 

 was one of a group of 188 arm chairs ordered in 1818 by Henry Clay 

 and used in the United States House of Representatives until 1857. 

 The chair, upholstered in its original black horsehair, bears the label of 

 the maker, T. Constantine and Company of New York City. The 

 Honorable John W. McCormack, Speaker of the House, presented the 

 Museum with the flag flown at the Capitol during the time the body of 

 President Kennedy was lying in state. 



Among the pieces of unusually fine jewelry given by Mrs. Merri- 

 weather Post are a necklace of diamonds and oriental emeralds and a 

 ring set with a large oblong emerald. Her daughter, Mme. Leon Barzin, 

 gave a pair of pear-shaped diamond earrings once owned by Marie 

 Antionette; another daughter, Mrs. Augustus Riggs IV, presented a 

 seed-pearl bag with platinum frame set with rubies, emeralds, and 

 sapphires. 



Remarkable during the past year was the increased number of 

 institutions and private individuals from abroad contributing to the 

 growth of the numismatic collections. Among them were the Hermit- 

 age in Leningrad; the mints of Australia, the Netherlands, Norway, 

 Nationalist China, and Pakistan; the banks of Guatemala, New Zea- 

 land, and Venezuela; the Deutsche Bundesbank; the Bayerische 

 Hypotheken- und Wechsel-Bank; the Australian Numismatic Society; 

 as well as engravers and medallic art companies from Denmark and 

 Italy. Frederick Hauck donated an impressive collection of 2478 gold 

 coins, among them 1918 United States pieces which filled many gaps 

 in the branch-mint issues in the national collections, and 560 foreign 

 gold and platinum coins as well as medals encompassing the entire 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 133 



world. Other additions to the United States series came from Mrs. 

 F. G. C. Boyd, who gave 934 United States tokens and medalets. 



From the Stack family in New York came many donations, among 

 which should be noted particularly a group of trial impressions of 

 United States coins and pay orders signed in 1795 by David Ritten- 

 house, first Director of the United States Mint. Mr. Willis H. du Pont 

 added to his previous gifts of Russian coins, formerly owned by the 

 Grand Duke G. Mikhailovitch, a group of 923 coins and medals in 

 silver and bronze encompassing the period from Catherine II to 

 Alexander I. Mrs. Wayte Raymond contributed over 2000 foreign 

 coins struck during the 19th and 20th centuries. A well-rounded 

 collection of coins of Nepal from the 1 7th through the 20th century was 

 presented by Mr. Paul W. Rose. 



Outstanding among the philatelic objects acquired is a unique cover 

 and its enclosure, carried by John Wise in his balloon Jupiter, August 

 17, 1859, from Lafayette, Ind., on the first attempt to carry American 

 mail by air under authority of postal officials. The cover was pur- 

 chased through the Charles and Rosanna Batchelor fund and the 

 Milton A. Holmes Memorial fund. A specialized collection of 2392 

 stamps of various nations commemorating Rotary International was 

 received from Dr. Joseph H. Kler of New Brunswick, N.J. Portions 

 of this collection, important for its scope and completeness, were 

 exhibited at a special ceremony in Washington, D.C., held to observe 

 the issuance of new Rotary commemorative stamps by the Republic 

 of China. An additional 80,000 postage stamps, with perforated 

 initials, were given by Mr. and Mrs. Victor J. Van Lint of Riverside, 

 Calif., and additional essays, proofs, and photographs of the stamps of 

 China were given by Mr. and Mrs. R. O. D. Hopkins of Contoocook, 

 N.H. 



ARMED FORCES HISTORY 



Significant additions to the national collection of historic warship 

 models, being installed by the division of naval history in the new hall 

 of armed forces history, include an attractive admiralty-style model 

 of the 44-gun H.M.S. Boston, a vessel constructed for the Royal 

 Navy in 1748 by Yankee shipwrights; a superb model of the United 

 States Revenue cutter Bear, representing that historic vessel under sail 

 during her late 19th-century service in Alaskan waters; and impressive 

 models of the nuclear submarine George Washington, the nuclear frigate 

 Bainbridge, and the U.S. Coast Guard cutter Vigilant. 



A remarkable group of maps and nautical charts, located at Ellicott 

 City, Md., by Philip K. Lundeberg, includes an early hydrographic 




134 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



survey (ca. 1828) of the harbor of Annapolis, Md.; pre-construction 

 maps of the proposed Chesapeake and Potomac Canal and the Erie 

 Canal; early 19th-century nautical charts of North American waters, 

 retailed by Edmund Blunt; and, most significant for the history of 

 exploration, a series of four manuscript charts of the southern coast of 

 South America prepared during the Malaspina Expedition, an official 

 survey conducted by the Spanish Navy in that quarter from 1798 to 

 1799. 



The Medal of Honor and other decorations, orders, and service 

 medals awarded Major George G. McMurtry for conspicuous gallantry 

 in action with the "Lost Battalion" in World War I were presented by 

 Mrs. McMurtry. The Medal of Honor is the only example of this 

 unique decoration from the modern period, during which it has been 

 rarely awarded, in the national collections. From the Patent Office 

 came an important group of ordnance patent models that supplement 

 the already extensive and unique collection in the division of military 

 history. A rare Confederate cutlass was received from Douglas 

 R. Williams. 



The collections of materials from underwater sites were increased 

 substantially during the year through field activity in Bermuda during 

 July and August 1965. A large collection of sherds from the Spanish 

 site, believed to be late 16th century, were acquired. From these frag- 

 ments some 1 5 individual shapes of redware pottery probably can be 

 reconstructed. A significant collection of ordnance materials recov- 

 ered from the site of VHerminie, a. French frigate which sank in 1838, 

 includes a device which may be a pill-lock firing mechanism for the 

 heavy guns. If this identification proves to be correct, the device will 

 be a very rare specimen, as this type of lock was transitional and in use 

 for only a brief period. 



An early 18th-century iron naval cannon came to the collections as a 

 gift from the DACOR Corporation through its vice president, Mr. 

 D. L. Davison. This piece was recovered from a site, as yet unidentified, 

 lying on Banner Reef south of Jamaica, West Indies. 




Exhibits 



SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 



Two major exhibition halls were opened in their entirety, and two 

 others in part. The hall of civil engineering was dedicated on July 8, 

 1964, and the hall of American merchant shipping, on November 12, 

 1964. In September 1964, the refrigeration and diesel sections of 

 the hall of heavy machinery were opened, and in February 1965, 

 that portion of the hall of electricity representing communications, 

 power, and electrical measurement. 



The division of electricity undertook a notable program of special 

 exhibitions. In July 1964, the exhibition "Communications in Space" 

 brought before the Museum's visitors the story of communications 

 satellites from its beginning in 1958. The exhibit is based upon 

 eight operable satellites received from the American Telephone and 

 Telegraph Co. (Telstar I), National Aeronautics and Space Adminis- 

 tration (Echo I, Relay I, and Syncom II), Department of the Army 

 (Score and Courier), U.S. Air Force and the Lincoln Laboratory of the 

 Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Westford), and the American 

 Radio Relay League (Oscar). The exhibit is completed by an ani- 

 mated diorama illustrating the variety of modern communications 

 systems and by an exhibit relating to the Satellite Communications 

 Corporation. For this exhibit, which is scheduled for a 2-year showing, 

 an illustrated brochure was prepared. 



Special exhibits were opened on the history of electrical transformers, 

 on early modern scientific instruments, and on the Verrazano-Narrows 

 bridge. The exhibit of transformers, in October 1964, was occasioned 

 by the loan of two historic transformers of 1885 by the Budapest 

 Historical Museum. Through the courtesy of the Hungarian Gov- 

 ernment Peter Asztalos of the Ganz Electrical Works of Budapest 

 presented two lectures here in connection with this exhibit. The 

 exhibit of early modern instruments consisted of a collection, chiefly of 

 17th- and 18th-century instruments, owned by David H. H. Felix 

 of Philadelphia. 



A showing in March and April 1965 of 43 drawings and paintings 

 by Lili Rethi recorded the construction of the Verrazano-Narrows 

 bridge, 1961-65. Also shown in March 1965 was a collection of 

 prints from the civil engineering collections, to be circulated by the 

 Smithsonian traveling exhibition service. 



135 




136 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



ARTS AND MANUFACTURES 



In September the halls of hand and photomechanical graphic-arts 

 processes were opened. To the collections and exhibits transferred 

 from the old building were added new cases and redesigned displays, 

 among them a handsome free-standing installation of the diorama on 

 Japanese woodcutting. The first special exhibition, "Sporting and 

 Western Lithographs by Currier & Ives," was shown in the special 

 exhibition hall, April through May 1965. The exhibit of photographs 

 by Sam Falk, installed June 1964 in the exhibit hall in the Arts and 

 Industries building, was extended through the year. 



Installation of the Tuve Van de Graaff accelerator in the hall of 

 nuclear energy was virtually completed. This machine was dismantled 

 at the division of terrestrial magnetism of the Carnegie Institution 

 under the supervision of M. A. Tuve and Louis Brown. The supporting 

 columns were redesigned by the staff. The reinstallation by exhibits 

 specialist Abraham Richards and museum technicians John Carter 

 and Francis Gadson has required meticulous measurements and the 

 fitting of a complicated mass of instrumentation in an area difficult 

 of access. 



Plans were advanced for extension of the demonstration program of 

 the division of textiles to include spinning as well as weaving. In 

 January demonstrations of tapestry weaving started on an experimental 

 basis in the Arts and Industries building. These "live" exhibits, even 

 on their present limited scale, continue to draw local residents as 

 well as tourists, who actively participate by asking questions. 



Examples of contemporary and 19th-century hand-weaving and 

 needlework were lent to the Instituto de Cultura Hispanica for a 

 special exhibition in Madrid, "Arte Popular de America y Filipanas." In- 

 cluded were a 20th-century afghan, poncho, stole, guest towel, and 

 overshot coverlet, as well as a 19th-century overshot coverlet, a silk 

 slumber throw of 1883, and an applique album quilt of 1847. 



Preparation for the reopening of the textile hall in the Museum of 

 History and Technology is under way. One area of the new hall 

 will be reserved for special changing exhibits drawn from the collections 

 and from temporary loans. 



Part of the glass gallery was opened September 18, 1964. A special 

 exhibition of 65 contemporary glass objects chosen by the curator and 

 given by Leerdam factory in Holland is being installed in it. The 

 opening of the ceramic hall, in production throughout the year, is 

 scheduled for early spring, 1966. 



The popular beehive unfortunately had to be closed down during 




Gallery of glass, opened October 1964. traces the history of glassmaking from 

 about 1500 B.C. to the present. 



Installing the Tuve Van de Graaff accelerator in the future hall of nuclear 



energy. 




History of the posts exhibit in newly opened hall of philately and postal history, 

 Museum of History and Technology. Below: Transportation of the mails 

 exhibit. 




Die transfer press, used by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing for the 

 preparation of printing plates, is exhibited in the stamp production section. 

 Below: Country-store post office of about 1880, furnished with original 

 equipment, is a principal exhibit in the new hall. 




Nineteenth-century screw coining press in the new hall of monetary history 

 and medallic art. This type of press, known as early as the 16th century, 

 was widely used between 1700 and 1830. In the background, display of 

 United States coins. Below: The Honorable John W. Snyder, former 

 Secretary of the Treasury, and Director of the Mint Eva Adams examine 

 display of currencies circulated in Colonial America. 




EXHIBITS 137 



the winter because the colony proved too small for survival. It is 

 hoped to modify the hive and install a larger colony during the current 

 season. 



CIVIL HISTORY 



The numismatic displays in the Arts and Industries building were 

 moved to the new Museum of History and Technology, where the hall 

 of numismatics was opened Friday, October 23, 1964. While the 

 layout differs in many respects from that previously used, the general 

 character of the exhibit remains the same. The exhibits trace the 

 evolution of money within a sequence of significant historical events 

 and show it as an integral part of the cultural development of human 

 society. Additional features are the world's largest collection of gold 

 coins on display and the famous United States Mint collection, which 

 had its inception in the late 18th century. 



Among the special numismatic displays were "The Kennedy Half 

 Dollar," with original mint models and designs made available by the 

 United States Mint; "The Austrian Empire and Its Currencies," an 

 historical exhibit made possible by a recent donation from Mortimer 

 and Anna Neinken; and "A Selection of Contemporary Artistic Medals 

 from Europe," featuring prominent artists from France, Germany, 

 Greece, and Italy. 



The Reifenberg collection, illustrating Israel's ancient history through 

 its coins, was displayed from November 1964 through January 1965. 

 Starting with two exceedingly rare pieces struck in Judaea under 

 Persian rule, the exhibit, featuring a virtually complete series of ancient 

 Judaean coins, was made possible through the cooperation of Mrs. 

 Esther Reifenberg of Jerusalem, and Mr. M. Avida, Director, Cultural 

 Relations Department of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Jerusalem, 

 Israel. 



A temporary display, arranged through the courtesy of the Argentina 

 Mint, illustrated coins and paper currencies of Argentina and included 

 master hubs for the silver peso of 1881, Argentina's first national coin; 

 the original model for the Liberty-head appearing on many of its 

 coins; a wooden block for the 1000-peso banknote — the first issue made 

 at the Buenos Aires Mint in 1889; as well as color proofs for projects 

 of banknotes. 



The first international numismatic display ever held in the United 

 States was organized by V. Clain-Stefanelli in August 1964, on the 

 occasion of the convention of the American Numismatic Association 

 in Cleveland. The displays from 20 countries represented contribu- 

 tions from 41 exhibitors. 




138 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 — MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



The hall of philately and postal history was opened September 18, 

 1964, after ceremonies at which more than 500 guests were addressed 

 by assistant postmaster general Ralph Nicholson and James Conlon, 

 chief, currency and stamp manufacturing, Bureau of Engraving and 

 Printing. The new exhibits include more than 70 major units dealing 

 with the history of the world's posts, United States stamp production, 

 transportation of the mails, United States and foreign postal stationery, 

 and the history of revenue stamps and stamped paper. Among them 

 are a comprehensive selection of stamps of the world from the national 

 collection, exhibited in 473 pull-out frames; the re-creation of a country- 

 store post office, ca. 1880, furnished with original equipment and fix- 

 tures; 15th- and 16th-century correspondence carried by the posts of 

 the Republic of Venice; papyrus letters from Egypt; and a cover with its 

 enclosure, carried by John Wise in his balloon Jupiter in 1859 from 

 Lafayette, Ind., on the first attempt to transport mail by air under 

 authorization of postal officials. The new hall, developed under 

 former curators George T. Turner and Francis J. McCall and the pres- 

 ent associate curator in charge, Carl H. Scheele, is the only permanent 

 exhibition in the United States which presents a comprehensive and 

 large-scale survey of postal history and stamp production. 



A special exhibition of stamps from the Federal Republic of West 

 Germany was opened in April 1965 by His Excellency Heinrich 

 Knappstein, the German Ambassador. Postal issues of the recent 

 post-war period displayed included stamps honoring the late John F. 

 Kennedy and the German resistance to the Nazis during World War II. 



Inclusion of a California post-gold-rush ranch- house kitchen in the hall 

 of every day life in the American past became possible when an appro- 

 priate room was found in Siskiyou County, Calif. Remarkable for never 

 having been disturbed since it was constructed about 1862, and for 

 bearing its original blue paint, the kitchen of tongue-and-groove 

 boards was dismantled by George H. Watson, specialist in the restora- 

 tion of old structures, and his assistant, Charles H. Rowell. Not only 

 was the interior woodwork removed, but also the peeled cedar post 

 rafters and pine roofers from the roof overhead and the heavy pine 

 floor joists and stone piers supporting them. All were reconstructed in 

 the exhibit hall by Watson and his crew so that the visitor views the 

 room with its structure above and below, as though looking into a 

 cross-section of the house. The kitchen is equipped with furnishings 

 and utensils of the period collected in California and originally used 

 there. On the other side of the kitchen is a temporary exhibit, "The 

 Chinese in California," and nearby are prints and paintings lent by 

 Joan Pearson Watkins. The kitchen and its associated exhibits, con- 




EXHIBITS 139 



ceived and planned by C. Malcolm Watkins, were opened on May 7, 

 1965, with a ceremony and reception sponsored jointly by the Cali- 

 fornia State Society of D.C. and the Smithsonian. For this occasion, 

 the historic gold nugget found by James Marshall at Sutter's Mill, 

 which inspired the great California gold rush, was specially exhibited. 



An exhibit of furniture from the Surrender Room of the McLean 

 House at Appomattox, Va., marked the 100th anniversary of the 

 surrender on April 9, 1865. An exhibition, opened May 29, 1965, 

 marking the 200th anniversary of the Virginia Resolves against the 

 Stamp Act, includes sections on the passage of the Stamp Act, the 

 colonial reaction to it, and its eventual repeal. The exhibit will con- 

 tinue into the bicentennial years of these events, through 1965 into 

 1966. 



"The Victorian American," a temporary exhibit of prints from the 

 Harry T. Peters lithography collection, was organized by Peter C. 

 Welsh to illustrate the national character of Americans during the 

 Victorian era. 



ARMED FORCES HISTORY 



Completion of exhibits for the armed forces halls has occupied the 

 entire staff of the department. 



The preparation of General George Washington's headquarters tent, 

 a unique specimen in an excellent state of preservation, considering its 

 age, proved an unusual and exacting task (cleaning, repairing, and 

 preparing the tent itself for exhibition are described on p. 125). An 

 undertent of unchemically treated linen was constructed and mounted 

 over a chemically inert metal frame. The original tent was then placed 

 over the whole with no resultant stress on any seams or fibers. One 

 end of the tent was opened to present a period-room display using con- 

 temporary camp furniture and objects. The whole was enclosed in a 

 glass case. 



Completion of the extensive exhibit of the Continental gondola 

 Philadelphia marked a memorable stage in the long history of that re- 

 markable relic of the American Revolution. A system of ramps and 

 protective railings enables visitors to view this heavily armed gunboat 

 from all elevations, while ensuring her physical security. Nearby are 

 cases of artifacts recovered from the Philadelphia site on Lake Champlain, 

 as well as a series of maps illustrating Benedict Arnold's Northern Cam- 

 paign of 1776, in which this historic man-of-war served. 




Visitor Services 



An important and extensive program for utilizing the Museum's 

 ancient instruments in a series of concerts was initiated by Mrs. Cynthia 

 Adams Hoover. In these activities she has been assisted by museum 

 specialist Jay Scott Odell. 



Winter concert activities included a program of music of the 1860's 

 played on brass instruments of that period from the collections. The 

 musical arrangements were taken directly from the band books of the 

 Third New Hampshire Regiment of the period (at popular request, 

 this music was played again in a concert on the Mall). The English 

 Consort of Viols played at the Smithsonian in November. The con- 

 cert by Frans Brueggen, recorder, and Gustav Leonhardt, playing on 

 the Museum's restored 1745 Dulcken harpsichord, was considered by 

 local music critics as one of the highlights of the Washington musical 

 year. In December, the Smithsonian and the Library of Congress 

 were hosts to the national meetings of the American Musicological 

 Society and the College Music Society, for which a concert featuring 

 Carissimi's Oratorio "Jonas" was arranged. 



Music on the Mall was initiated in May on the Museum's terrace 

 with the National Symphony Orchestra. The Honorable Adlai Steven- 

 son, Ambassador to the United Nations, narrated Aaron Copland's 

 "Lincoln Portrait," and the young pianist Andre Watts played Saint- 

 Saens' Concerto No. 2. Tower music was a weekly feature in summer. 

 Played by five wind musicians from the top of the north portico of the 

 Renwick-designed Smithsonian building, it began the summer Tuesday 

 evening music series in early June. These new developments have 

 materially changed the atmosphere of the Mall lying between the 

 Smithsonian's buildings. Mrs. Hoover collaborated in the extensive 

 research leading to the design and construction of a new music platform 

 and background shell for the outdoor concerts on the terrace. 



Several lectures and forums were sponsored in the department of 

 civil history. Stella Mary Newton, advisor to the restoration depart- 

 ment of the National Gallery, London, gave a lecture "Social Impli- 

 cations in the Costumes in Hogarth's Paintings." John Harris, keeper 

 of drawings of the Royal Institute of British Architects, lectured on 

 "William Kent." Scott Symons, formerly assistant-curator-in-charge 

 of the Canadiana collections, The Royal Ontario Museum, lectured 

 publicly on "French Canadiana Versus the American Dream" and 

 gave an intramuseum seminar on the same subject. (Mr. Symons also 

 spent three weeks in residence as a visiting scholar studying the 

 Museum's furniture collections.) 



140 




VISITOR SERVICES 141 



In association with the Naval Historical Foundation, the division 

 of naval history inaugurated an annual series of lectures on naval and 

 maritime history. In November 1964, the noted German naval 

 historian Vizeadmiral Friedrich C. Ruge presented an illustrated 

 lecture, "Rommel and the Invasion of Western Europe, 1944," before 

 a capacity audience of military and naval historians. As former 

 naval advisor to the colorful field marshal, Ruge described Rommel's 

 dogged but unsuccessful efforts to concentrate German armored 

 strength on the Normandy coast on the eve of Operation "Overlord." 

 In March 1965, the division again joined with the Foundation in 

 sponsoring a lecture, "The Defense of Trade in World Wars I and 

 II," by the distinguished British historian, Captain Stephen W. Roskill, 

 R.N. Drawing not only upon his voluminous official history, The 

 War at Sea, but also on his recent researches on British naval policy 

 between the wars, Roskill analyzed the nigh-disastrous Allied under- 

 estimation of a renewed U-boat threat in 1939 and presented a critical 

 evaluation of the role once again played by the convoy system in 

 safeguarding Allied sea communications. 





International Exchange Service 





International Exchange Service 

 J. A. Collins, Chief 



The original plan of organization of the Smithsonian Institution 

 provided for a system of exchange of current publications which would 

 afford the Smithsonian Institution the most ready means of entering 

 into friendly relations and correspondence with all the learned societies 

 in the world and of enriching the Smithsonian library with the current 

 transactions and proceedings of foreign institutions. 



When the first of the Smithsonian's long series of scientific publica- 

 tions was issued, copies were sent to scientific and learned institutions 

 abroad. In return, the Smithsonian Institution received many 

 valuable publications from foreign institutions. To continue this de- 

 sirable international exchange of scientific information, the Smithso- 

 nian Institution appointed agents in a number of foreign countries to 

 distribute the publications received from the Smithsonian Institution 

 and to forward to the Smithsonian Institution the publications received 

 from the foreign institutions. 



In 1851 the privilege of transmitting publications through the 

 Smithsonian Institution to other countries, and of receiving publica- 

 tions from foreign institutions in return, was extended to other insti- 

 tutions in the United States. This opportunity to distribute their 

 publications abroad was eagerly accepted and the system grew so 

 rapidly that today most Government agencies, many universities, 

 and scientific organizations representing every State in the Union 

 utilize the International Exchange Service. 



Among the many colleges and universities transmitting publications 

 through the Service during the past fiscal year were the following: 

 University of California, Columbia University, Cornell University, 

 Harvard College, University of Illinois, Indiana University, University 

 of Kansas, University of Michigan, University of Oregon, University 

 of Pennsylvania, Princeton University, University of Texas, University 

 of Virginia, and Yale University. 



In fiscal year 1965, the International Exchange Service received for 

 transmission 989,779 pounds of publications from foreign and domestic 

 sources. This was a slight decrease from the preceding year. Of the 

 amount received, 115,537 pounds were from foreign sources for dis- 

 tribution to addressees in the United States. A strike of the long- 

 shoremen on the east coast of the United States affected the operation 



145 



789-427—66 21 




146 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



THE NUMBER AND WEIGHT OF PACKAGES RECEIVED FROM 

 FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC SOURCES FOR TRANSMISSION 

 THROUGH THE INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE SERVICE FISCAL 

 YEAR 1965. 



of the Service from the middle of December 1964 until March 1965. 

 Another strike in June by the Maritime unions against some of the 

 steamship lines delayed the forwarding of publications to many countries. 



Publications were received from more than 350 different organizations, 

 institutions, Government bureaus, Congressional committees, agricul- 

 tural experiment stations, and individuals during the year for trans- 

 mission to more than 100 different countries. 



Publications weighing 624,125 pounds, 70 percent of the total 

 weight received for transmission abroad, were forwarded by ocean 

 freight at a cost to the Smithsonian Institution of $36,856, or approx- 

 imately 5.9 cents per pound. 




INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE SERVICE 147 



Addressed packages of publications are mailed directly to the intended 

 addressees in the countries that do not have exchange bureaus. During 

 the past fiscal year packages of addressed publications weighing 259,354 

 pounds — 30 percent of the total weight received for transmission 

 abroad — were mailed to the intended addressees at a cost to the Smith- 

 sonian Institution of $61,039, or approximately 23.5 cents per pound. 



Listed below are the names of the foreign exchange bureaus to which 

 the International Exchange Service forwards addressed packages of 

 publications for distribution to the intended recipients. 



List of Exchange Services 



Austria: Austrian National Library, Vienna. 



Belgium: Service des Echanges Interna tionaux, Bibliotheque Roy ale de 



Belgique, Bruxelles. 

 China: National Central Library, Taipei, Taiwan. 

 Czechoslovakia: Bureau of International Exchanges, University Library, 



Prague. 

 Denmark: Institut Danois des Echanges Internationaux, Bibliotheque Royale, 



Copenhagen. 

 Egypt: Government Press, Publications Office, Bulaq, Cairo. 

 Finland: Library of the Scientific Societies, Helsinki. 



France: Service des Echanges Internationaux, Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. 

 Germany (Eastern) : Deutsche Staatsbibliothek, Berlin. 

 Germany (Western) : Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Bad Godesberg. 

 Hungary: Service Hongrois des Echanges Internationaux, Orszagos Szechenyi 



Konyvtar, Budapest. 

 India: Government Printing and Stationery Office, Bombay. 

 Indonesia: Minister of Education, Djakarta. 

 Israel: Jewish National and University Library, Jerusalem. 

 Italy: Ufficio degli Scambi Internazionali, Ministero della Pubblica Istruzione, 



Rome. 

 Japan: Division for Interlibrary Services, National Diet Library, Tokyo. 

 Korea: National Central Library, Seoul. 



Netherlands: International Exchange Bureau of the Netherlands, Royal Li- 

 brary, The Hague. 

 New South Wales: Public Library of New South Wales, Sydney. 

 New Zealand: General Assembly Library, Wellington. 

 Norway: Service Norvegien des Echanges Internationaux, Bibliotheque de 



PUniversite Royale, Oslo. 

 Philippines: Bureau of Public Libraries, Department of Education, Manila. 

 Poland: Service Polonais des Echanges Internationaux, Bibliotheque 



Nationale, Warsaw. 

 Portugal: Servico Portugues de Trocas Internacionais, Biblioteca Nacional, 



Lisbon. 




148 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Queensland: Bureau of International Exchange of Publications, Chief Secre- 

 tary's Office, Brisbane. 



Republic of South Africa: Government Printing and Stationery Office, 

 Cape Town. 1 



Rumania: International Exchange Service, Biblioteca Centrala de Stat, 

 Bucharest. 



South Australia: South Australian Government Exchanges Bureau, Govern- 

 ment Printing and Stationery Office, Adelaide. 



Spain: Servicio National de Canje de Publicaciones, Biblioteca Nacional, 

 Madrid. 1 



Sweden: Kungliga Biblioteket, Stockholm. 



Switzerland: Service Suisse des Echanges Internationaux, Bibliotheque 

 Centrale Federate, Berne. 



Tasmania: Secretary of the Premier, Hobart. 



Turkey: National Library, Ankara. 



Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: Bureau of Book Exchange, State Lenin 

 Library, Moscow. 



Victoria: State Library of Victoria, Melbourne. 



Western Australia: State Library, Perth. 



Yugoslavia: Bibliografski Institut FNRJ, Belgrade. 



FOREIGN EXCHANGE OF GOVERNMENTAL DOCUMENTS 



The Smithsonian Institution received during the fiscal year 719,901 

 publications weighing 257,355 pounds for transmission to the recipients 

 of full sets of official U.S. Government publications, and 92,512 publi- 

 cations weighing 36,488 pounds for transmission to the recipients of 

 partial sets. The recipients of full sets receive copies of all of the official 

 publications, while the recipients of partial sets receive a selected list of 

 the official publications. 



Recipients of the Full Sets 



Argentina: Division Biblioteca, Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto, 



Buenos Aires. 

 Australia: National Library of Australia, Canberra. 



New South Wales: Public Library of New South Wales, Sydney. 



Queensland: Parliamentary Library, Brisbane. 



South Australia: Public Library of South Australia, Adelaide. 



Tasmania: Parliamentary Library, Hobart. 



Victoria: State Library of Victoria, Melbourne. 



Western Australia: State Library, Perth. 



1 Change in name. 




INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE SERVICE 149 



Austria: Administrative Library, Federal Chancellery, Vienna. 

 Belgium: Service Beige des Echanges Interna tionaux, Bruxelles. 

 Brazil: Biblioteca Nacional, Rio de Janiero. 

 Burma: Government Book Depot, Rangoon. 

 Canada: Library of Parliament, Ottawa. 



Manitoba: Provincial Library, Winnipeg. 



Ontario: Legislative Library, Toronto. 



Quebec: Library of the Legislature of the Province of Quebec. 



Saskatchewan: Legislative Library, Regina. 

 Ceylon: Department of Information, Government of Ceylon, Colomboi 

 Chile: Biblioteca Nacional, Santiago. 

 China: National Central Library, Taipei, Taiwan. 



National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan. 

 Colombia: Biblioteca Nacional, Bogota. 

 Costa Rica: Biblioteca Nacional, San Jose. 

 Cuba: Direction de Organismos Internacionales, Ministerio de Relaciones 



Exteriores, Habana. 

 Czechoslovakia: University Library, Prague. 



Denmark: Institut Danois des Echanges Internationaux, Copenhagen. 

 Egypt: Bureau des Publications, Ministere des Finances, Cairo. 

 Finland: Parliamentary Library, Helsinki. 

 France: Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. 

 Germany: Deutsche Staatsbibliothek, Berlin. 



Free University of Berlin, Berlin-Dahlem. 



Parliamentary Library, Bonn. 

 Great Britain: 



British Museum, London. 



London School of Economics and Political Science. Depository of the 

 London County Council.) 

 India: National Library, Calcutta. 



Central Secretariat Library, New Delhi. 



Parliament Library, New Delhi. 

 Indonesia: Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Djakarta. 

 Ireland: National Library of Ireland, Dublin. 

 Israel: State Archives and Library, Hakirya, Jerusalem. 

 Italy: Ministero della Pubblica Istruzione, Rome. 

 Japan: National Diet Library, Tokyo. 2 

 Mexico: Secretaria de Relaciones Exteriores, Departamento de Information 



para el Extranjero, Mexico, D.F. 

 Netherlands: Royal Library, The Hague. 

 New Zealand: General Assembly Library, Wellington. 

 Norway: University Library, Oslo. 

 Peru: Section de Propaganda y Publicaciones, Ministerio de Relaciones 



Exteriores, Lima. 

 Philippines: Bureau of Public Libraries, Department of Education, Manila. 



2 Receives two sets. 




150 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Portugal: Biblioteca Nacional, Lisbon. 



Republic of South Africa: State Library, Pretoria, Transvaal. 



Spain: Biblioteca Nacional, Madrid. 



Sweden: Kungliga Biblioteket, Stockholm. 



Switzerland: Bibliotheque Centrale Federate, Berne. 



Turkey: National Library, Ankara. 



Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: Ail-Union Lenin Library, Moscow. 



United Nations: Library of the United Nations, Geneva, Switzerland. 



Uruguay: Oficina de Canje Internacional de Publicaciones, Montevideo. 



Venezuela: Biblioteca Nacional, Caracas. 



Yugoslavia: Bibliografski Institut FNRJ, Belgrade. 2 



Recipients of the Partial Sets 



Afghanistan: Library of the Afghan Academy, Kabul. 

 Belgium: Bibliotheque Royale, Bruxelles. 



Bolivia: Biblioteca del Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Gulto, La Paz. 

 Brazil: Minas Gerais: Departmento Estadul de Estatistica, Belo Horizonte. 

 British Guiana: Government Secretary's Office, Georgetown, Demerara. 

 Cambodia: Les Archives et Bibliotheque Nationale, Phnom-Penh. 

 Canada: Alberta: Provincial Library, Edmonton. 

 British Columbia: Provincial Library, Victoria. 

 New Brunswick: Legislative Library, Fredericton. 

 Newfoundland: Department of Provincial Affairs, St. John's. 

 Nova Scotia: Provincial Secretary of Nova Scotia, Halifax. 

 Dominican Republic: Bibloteca de la Universidad de Santo Domingo, Santo 



Domingo. 

 Ecuador: Biblioteca Nacional, Quito. 

 El Salvador: Biblioteca Nacional, San Salvador. 



Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, San Salvador. 

 Greece: National Library, Athens. 

 Guatemala: Bioblioteca Nacional, Guatemala. 

 Haiti: Bibliotheque Nationale, Port-au-Prince. 

 Honduras: Biblioteca Nacional, Tegucigalpa. 



Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Tegucigalpa. 

 Iceland: National Library, Reykjavik. 

 India: 



Bombay: Sachivalaya Central Library, Bombay. 

 Bihar: Revenue Department, Patna. 

 Kerala: Kerala Legislature Secretariat, Trivandrum. 

 Uttar Pradesh: 



University of Allahabad, Allahabad. 

 Secretariat Library, Lucknow. 

 West Bengal: Library, West Bengal Legislative Secretariat, Assembly 

 House, Calcutta. 



2 Receive two sets 




INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE SERVICE 151 



Iran: Imperial Ministry of Education, Tehran. 

 Iraq,: Public Library, Baghdad. 

 Jamaica: Colonial Secretary, Kingston. 



University College of the West Indies, St. Andrew. 

 Lebanon: American University of Beirut, Beirut. 

 Liberia: Department of State, Monrovia. 

 Malaysia: Federal Secretariat, Federation of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur 



National Library, Singapore. 1 

 Malta: Minister for the Treasury, Valletta. 

 Nicaragua: Ministerio de Relaciones Exterior es, Managua. 

 Pakistan: Central Secretariat Library, Karachi. 

 Panama: Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Panama. 



Paraguay: Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriors, Section Biblioteca, Asuncion. 

 Philippines: House of Representatives, Manila. 

 Scotland: National Library of Scodand, Edinburgh. 

 Sudan: University of Khartoum, Khartoum. 1 

 Thailand: National Library, Bangkok. 

 Viet-Nam: Direction des Archives et Bibliotheques Nationales, Saigon. 



INTERPARLIAMENTARY EXCHANGE OF THE OFFICIAL 



JOURNALS 



There are being sent on exchange through the International Ex- 

 change Service 110 copies of the daily issues of the Congressional Record 

 and 88 copies of the daily issues of the Federal Register. Listed below 

 are the names and addresses of the recipients of the official journals. 



Recipients of the Congressional Record and Federal Register 



Algeria: Direction de la Documentation, Ministere de l'Orientation, Algiers. 4 5 

 Argentina: Biblioteca del Poder Judicial, Mendoza. 3 



Direction General del Boletin Oficial e Imprentas, Buenos Aires. 



Camara de Diputados Oficina de Information Parliamentaria, Buenos 

 Aires. 

 Australia: National Library of Australia, Canberra. 



New South Wales: Library of Parliament of New South Wales, Sydney. 



Queensland: Chief Secretary's Office, Brisbane. 



Victoria: State Library of Victoria, Melbourne. 3 



Western Australia: Library of Parliament of Western Australia, Perth. 

 Belgium: Bibliotheque du Parlement, Palais de la Nation, Brussels. 4 

 Brazil: Biblioteca da Camara dos Deputados, Brasilia, D.F. 4 



Biblioteca do Senado Federal, Brasilia. 1 4 



1 Change in name. 3 Federal Register only. 4 Congressional Record only. 

 6 Added during the year. 




152 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Burundi: Departement des Affaires Juridiques et de Contentieux, Secretariat 



d'Etat a la Justice, Bujumbura. 3 5 

 Cambodia: Ministry of Information, Phnom-Penh. 

 Cameroon: Imprimerie Nationale, Yaounde. 3 

 Canada: Clerk of the Senate, Houses of Parliament, Ottawa. 



Library of Parliament, Ottawa. 

 Ceylon: Ceylon Ministry of Defense and External Affairs, Colombo. 4 

 Chile: Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional, Santiago. 4 

 China: Legislative Yuan, Taipei, Taiwan. 4 



Taiwan Provincial Assembly, Taichung, Taiwan 

 Cuba: Biblioteca Publica Panamericana, Habana. 3 

 Czechoslovakia: Ceskoslovenska Akademie Ved, Prague. 4 

 Ecuador, Archivo-Biblioteca del Poder Legislativo, Quito. 3 5 

 Egypt: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Egyptian Government, Cairo. 4 

 Finland: Library of the Parliament, Helsinki. 4 

 France: Bibliotheque Assemblee Nationale, Paris. 



Bibliotheque Conseil de la Republique, Paris. 



Library, Organization for European Economic Cooperation, Paris. 4 



Bibliotheque du Conseil de PEurope, Strasbourg. 4 



Service de la Documentation Etrangere Assemblee Nationale, Paris. 4 

 Gabon: Secretary General, Assemblee Nationale, Libreville. 4 

 Germany: Amerika Institut der Universitat Miinchen, Miinchen. 



Archiv, Deutscher Bundestag, Bonn. 



Bibliothek des Instituts fur Weltwirtschaft an der Universitat Kiel, 

 Kiel-Wik. 



Bibliothek Hessischer Landtag, Wiesbaden. 4 



Deutsches Institut fur Rechtswissenschaft, Potsdam-Babelsberg II. 3 



Deutscher Bundesrat, Bonn. 4 



Deutscher Bundestag, Bonn. 4 



Hamburgisches Welt-Wirtschafts-Archiv, Hamburg. 



Staatsbibliothek der Stiftung Preussischer Kulturbestiz, Berlin- 

 Dahlem. 1 4 • 

 Great Britain: Department of Printed Books, British Museum, London. 



House of Commons Library, London. 4 



N.P.P. Warehouse, H.M. Stationery Office, London. 3 7 



Printed Library of the Foreign Office, London. 4 



Royal Institute of International Affairs, London. 4 

 Greece: Bibliotheque Chambre des Deputes, Hellenique, Athens. 

 Guatemala: Biblioteca de la Asamblea Legislativa, Guatemala. 

 Haiti: Bibliotheque Nationale, Port-au-Prince. 

 Honduras: Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional, Tegucigalpa. 

 Hungary: Orszagos Szechenyi Konyvtar, Budapest. 



1 Change in name. 3 Federal Register only. 



4 Congressional Record only. 6 Added during the year. 



8 Three copies. 7 Two copies. 




INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE SERVICE 153 



India: Civil Secretariat Library, Lucknow, United Provinces. 3 



Jammu and Kashmir Constituent Assembly, Srinagar. 4 



Legislative Assembly, Government of Assam, Shillong. 4 



Legislative Assembly Library, Lucknow, United Provinces. 



Kerala Legislature Secretariat, Trivandrum. 4 



Madras State Legislature, Madras. 4 



Parliament Library, New Delhi. 



Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics, Poona. 4 

 Ireland: Dail Eireann, Dublin. 4 

 Israel: Library of the Knesset, Jerusalem. 

 Italy: Biblioteca Camera dei Deputati, Rome. 



Biblioteca del Senato della Republica, Rome. 



International Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome. 3 



Periodicals Unit, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 

 Nations, Rome. 3 

 Ivory Coast: Chef des Services Legislatifs, Assemblee Nationale, Abidjan. 4 

 Japan: Library of the National Diet, Tokyo. 



Ministry of Finance, Tokyo. 

 Jordan: Parliament of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Amman. 4 

 Korea: Library, National Assembly, Seoul. 



Kying Hee University, Seoul. 4 6 

 Luxembourg: Assemblee Commune de la C.E.C.A., Luxembourg. 

 Mexico: Direccion General de Information, Secretaria de Governacion, 

 Mexico, D.F. 



Biblioteca Benjamin Franklin, Mexico, D.F. 



Aguascalientes: Gobernador del Estado de Aguascalientes, Aguas- 

 calientes. 



Baja California: Gobierno del Estado de Baja California, Mexicali. 



Campeche: Gobernador del Estado de Campeche. 



Chiapas: Gobernador del Estado de Chiapas, Tuxtla Gutierrez. 



Chihuahua: Gobernador del Estado de Chihuahua, Chihuahua. 



Coahuila: Periodico Oficial del Estado de Coahuila, Palacio de 

 Gobierno, Saltillo. 



Colima: Gobernador del Estado de Colima, Colima. 



Guanajuato: Secretaria General de Gobierno del Estado, Guanajuato. 



Jalisco: Biblioteca del Estado, Guadalajara. 



Mexico: Gaceta del Gobierno, Toluca. 



Michoagan: Secretaria General de Gobierno del Estado de Michoacan, 

 Morelia. 



Morelos: Palacio de Gobierno, Cuernavaca. 



Nayarit: Gobernador de Nayarit, Tepic. 



Nuevo Leon: Biblioteca del Estado, Monterrey. 



Oaxaca: Periodico Oficial, Palacio de Gobierno, Oaxaca. 3 



Puebla: Secretaria General de Gobierno, Puebla. 



Queretaro: Secretaria General de Gobierno, Section de Archivo, 

 Queretaro. 



Sinaloa: Direccion del Periodico Oficial C E1 Estado de Sinaloa, Culiacan. 




154 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Sonora: Gobernador del Estado de Sonora, Hermosillo. 



Tamaulipas: Secretaria General de Gobierno, Victoria. 



Veracruz: Gobernador del Estado de Veracruz, Departamento de 

 Gobernacion y Justicia, Jalapa. 



Yucatan: Gobernador del Estado de Yucatan, Merida. 

 Netherlands: Koninklijke Bibliotheek, The Hague. 3 

 New Zealand: General Assembly Library, Wellington. 

 Nigeria: Office of the Clerk of the Legislature, Enugu. 4 



Office of the Western Nigeria Legislature, Ibadan. 4 



Clerk to the Regional Legislature, Mid-West Region, Benin City. 3 5 

 Norway: Library of the Norwegian Parliament, Oslo. 

 Pakistan: Secretary, Provincial Assembly West Pakistan, Lahore. 4 



National Assembly of Pakistan, Rawalpindi. 4 6 

 Panama: Biblioteca Nacional, Panama City. 4 

 Philippines: House of Representatives, Manila. 

 Poland: Kancelaria Rady Panstwa, Biblioteka Sejmowa, Warsaw. 

 Republic of South Africa: Cape of Good Hope: Library of Parliament, 

 Cape Town. 



Transkei: Legislative Assembly, Umtata. 4 5 



Transvaal: State Library, Pretoria 

 Rhodesia: Legislative Assembly, Lusaka. l 3 

 Rumania: Biblioteca Centrala de Stat RPR, Bucharest. 

 Rwanda: Service de la Legislation, Cabinet du President, Kigali. 3 

 Senegal: Secretaire-General, Assemblee Nationale, Dakar. 4 

 Sierra Leone: Office of the Clerk, House of Representatives, Freetown. 4 

 Spain: Boletin Oficial del Estado, Presidencia del Gobierno, Madrid. 3 

 Sweden: Universitetsbiblioteket, Uppsala. 

 Switzerland: International Labour Office, Geneva. 3 7 



Library, United Nations, Geneva. 

 Tanganyika: Library, University College, Dar es Salaam. 4 

 Togo: Ministere d'Etat, de l'lnterieur, de l'Information et de la Presse, Lome. 

 Uganda: National Assembly of Uganda, Parliament House, Kampala. 4 

 Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: Fundamental'niia Biblioteka 



Obshchestvennykh Nauk, Moscow. 

 Upper Volta: President de la Commission des Affaires Sociales et Culturelles, 

 Assemblee Nationale, Ouagadougou. 4 



Chef de Cabinet, Presidence, Ouagadougou. 3 

 Uruguay: Diario Oficial, Calle Florida 1178, Montevideo. 

 Yugoslavia: Bibliografski Institut FNRJ, Belgrade. 7 



Libraries, scientific societies, educational institutions, and individuals 

 may transmit publications through the International Exchange 

 Service to other countries if they are being sent on exchange or as gifts. 

 The publications must be packaged and addressed to the intended re- 

 cipients. Transportation charges to the Smithsonian Institution must 



Footnotes: see p. 152. 




INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE SERVICE 155 



be prepaid. There is no charge to the sender for the transportation 

 charges from the Smithsonian Institution to the intended addressees. 



Packages of publications are accepted for transmission to addressees 

 in all countries except to the mainland of China, North Korea, and 

 Communist-controlled areas of Viet-Nam. Packages of publications 

 from domestic sources intended for addressees in the United States or 

 in a territory subject to the jurisdiction of the United States are not 

 accepted for transmission. 



The work of the International Exchange Service serves as a means of 

 developing and executing, in part, the broad and comprehensive 

 objective of the Smithsonian Institution — "the diffusion of knowledge." 

 Over the years the Service has played a proud role in helping to 

 promote the rapid growth of science by facilitating the international 

 exchange of ideas. Libraries and learned institutions through- 

 out the world have been enriched by the publications received through 

 the Service from many institutions in the United States, and, in turn, 

 the libraries and learned institutions of the United States have bene- 

 fited from the publications received from the institutions in other 

 countries. 





National Zoological Park 





National Zoological Park 

 Theodore H. Reed, Director 



With the completion of the remodeled birdhouse (December 4, 1964), 

 efforts of the National Zoological Park were turned to restocking the 

 avian collection, which had dwindled during the time that there was 

 little exhibition space for birds. When the house opened to the public 

 on February 14, 1965, many new species were on view in addition to 

 the ones that of necessity had been kept behind the scenes during the 

 rebuilding. 



PURCHASES 



The major part of purchases for the year consisted of birds, but a 

 number of interesting mammals were also added to the collection. 



Most important of these was a young female gorilla, Femelle, bought 

 as a mate for Leonard, the male born at the National Zoo on January 

 10, 1964. Femelle and Leonard were not compatible, however, and 

 the new female was put with Tomoka, a 3}2-year-old male, also born 

 at the Zoo. This pairing has worked out most amicably. 



A pair of siamangs was obtained from a dealer. Twelve tenrecs 

 were bought from a collector who had obtained them in Madagascar. 

 These rare little insectivores had not been exhibited at the Zoo since 

 1910, and the Park was fortunate in securing two species: Hemicentetes 

 semispinosus, the streaked tenrec, and the so-called common tenrec, 

 Tenrec ecaudatus. 



Another interesting acquisition was a small-eared dog (Atelocynus 

 microtis) purchased as a mate for one secured last year. 



For many years the Zoo had only one ostrich, an elderly male. Six 

 young specimens of this interesting bird were obtained and are now 

 on exhibit in a yard near the birdhouse. 



Other purchases were: 



1 flat-headed cat (Felis planiceps) 6 honeycreepers 



1 owl monkey 3 Inca jays 



29 chipmunks 4 black-eared golden tanagers 



8 flying squirrels 1 azure jay 



1 bushbaby 2 green Inca jays 



1 female jaguar 2 San Bias jays 



159 




160 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



2 troupials 



4 Australian crested bronze-winged 



doves 

 2 American band-tailed pigeons 

 2 pied mynahs 



2 spectacled mocking thrushes 

 2 black-headed orioles 

 4 blue rock thrushes 

 2 white-winged trumpeters 

 1 Curtis python 

 6 mud puppies 



1 Texas lined snake 



2 black-necked screamers 

 10 turacos 



18 hummingbirds 



3 cocks-of-the-rock 



2 black-headed sugarbirds 



6 blue-shouldered mountain tanagers 



1 rufous motmot 



10 masked crimson tanagers 



2 quetzals 



4 violaceous jays 



3 Inca terns 



2 blue-eared pheasants 



2 common bronze-winged doves 



5 black-bellied glossy starlings 

 2 pagoda mynahs 



2 necklaced laughing thrushes 

 2 gold-headed mynahs 

 2 gray-headed mynahs 

 assorted finches 



4 pancake tortoises 

 1 prairie king snake 

 1 eastern hog snake 



1 black-necked garter snake 



BIRTHS 



The number of animals born and hatched in the Zoo during the 

 past year was gratifying. Reproduction of their kind is evidence that 

 animals have adjusted well to the necessarily artificial conditions of 

 captivity. The pygmy hippopotamuses for which the Zoo has long 

 been famous continue to breed. Offspring of the original male were 

 all named Gumdrop, but with the advent of the new sire progeny 

 were given the names of Greek letters, and the eight young ones, two 

 of which were born this year, bear names running from Alpha to Iota. 

 The Nile hippopotamuses also had another baby. 



Birds in the new house took to nest-building almost immediately 

 upon their transfer there. Of especial interest were the kookaburras 

 and the Indian moorhens. By June 30 three pairs of kookaburras, all 

 hatched at the National Zoological Park, were nesting. 



Following the procedure of previous years, all births and hatchings 

 are listed below, whether or not the young were successfully raised. In 

 many instances, the record of animals having bred in captivity is of 

 interest. 




"Archie" is the splendid adult orangutan Elf owls (Micrathene whitneyi) 

 obtained by exchange with the Toronto were obtained from the Ari- 

 Zoo on June 2, 1965. zona-Sonora Desert Museum 



by exchange. 



Aldabra tortoise with leg in 

 cast as a result of a spiral 

 oblique fracture of the right 

 humerus. Unable to walk on 

 three legs, it soon learned to 

 propel itself when put on a 

 trucker's dolly. 



Forty-two anacondas born from one female on February 15, 1965. The 

 young were approximately twenty inches long and one inch in diameter at 

 birth. 




The new great outdoor flight cage, shown here just after completion and 

 before the birds were moved in, may be entered from a walk leading through 

 the deer area, or by way of a bridge from the upper level of the birdhouse. 



Typical of the new exhibition concept in the renovated birdhouse is such a 

 grouping of birds as shown here in their natural habitat. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 



161 



*Stillborn, or died shortly after birth. 



789-427— 6C 



-22 




162 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



GIFTS 



The Zoo received a bequest from the Gordon Gaver estate, consisting 

 of a large number of reptiles, 25 mammals, and 3 birds. Mr. Gaver, 

 who died in August 1964, had for many years owned and operated a 

 roadside snake exhibit near Thurmont, Md. At his death, his entire 

 collection came to the National Zoological Park and made a note- 

 worthy addition. In some instances there were more specimens than 

 the Zoo could exhibit, and these were of great value as exchange 

 material with other zoos. 



The Montana Fish and Game Department sent two pronghorn 

 antelopes; the Japanese Embassy gave the Zoo a collection of 40 

 especially fine goldfishes which had been part of the exhibit at the 

 Japanese pavilion at the New York World's Fair. 



Space does not permit listing all gifts received during the year, but 

 a complete list of Mr. Gaver's collection, and other gifts of interest, 

 follows: 



Animal Rescue League, Washington, D.C., great black hawk. 



Back, Mrs. Allan N., Kensington, Md., boa constrictor. 



Blomeley, Dr. Charles P., Takoma Park, Md., cedar waxwing, 

 mourning dove. 



Boehm, Edward Marshall, Trenton, N.J., 3 white-cheeked turacos. 



Bryan, John R., Bethesda, Md., 2 boa constrictors. 



Capps, Mrs. Carol, Washington, D.C., Chinese macaque. 



Carrol, Robert, Springfield Va., timber rattlesnake. 



Charles, Mrs. R. H., Washington, D.C., 2 ring-necked doves, albino 

 ring-necked dove. 



Cochran, Dr. Doris, Washington, D.C., 2 tropical coral snakes. 



Cooper, William I., Washington, D.C., blue-faced toucan. 



DePrato, Mario, Washington, D.C., barking tree frog, 2 paradise 

 fish. 



Dixon, Lindon, Fairfax, Va., pine vole. 



Eaton, Rev. Charles E., Washington, D.C., 2 Congo pygmy frogs. 



Edmunds, W. W., Oxon Hill, Md., 2 sparrow hawks. 



Fowle, Mrs. Margaret, Bethesda, Md., 4 strawberry finches, orange 

 weaver, 2 cut-throat weavers, 2 African fire finches, Bengalee finch, 

 7 zebra finches, 2 red-eared waxbills. 



Gatti, Steve, Silver Spring, Md., Eleonora's falcon. 



Gaver, Gordon, Thurmont, Md., chimpanzee, woolly monkey, 9 

 rhesus monkeys, weeping capuchin, 3 capuchins, 2 green guenons, 2 

 sooty monkeys, 3 spider monkeys, 1 burro, 2 domestic goats, yellow- 

 and-blue macaw, 3 Pekin ducks, cantil, Mexican beaded lizard, gila 

 monster, African black cobra, Indian python (light phase), 2 coral 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 163 



snakes, 2 Cook's tree boas, 2 banded kraits, 1 1 Russell's vipers, emerald 

 tree boa, Gaboon viper, ball python, 27 Indian cobras, king cobra, 

 regal python, 2 sand boas, 5 many-banded kraits, 6 star tortoises, 4 

 black tegus, 2 anacondas, South American boa, Indian python (dark 

 phase), 4 American alligators, American crocodile, 2 chicken snakes, 

 6 pilot black snakes, corn snake, 59 common water snakes, timber 

 rattlesnake, 6 eastern diamondback rattlesnakes, 36 western dia- 

 mondback rattlesnakes, 55 cottonmouth moccasins, Galapagos tor- 

 toise, red-footed tortoise, 8 northern copperheads, indigo snake, 3 

 Philippine cobras, 2 Indian cobras, 22 miscellaneous water snakes. 



Gray, Dr. Clinton, Alexandria, Va., 2 cockatiels. 



Greenhall, Paul, Washington, D.C., 4 tropical hermit crabs, fresh- 

 water eel, tree frog, 2 giant toads. 



Griffin, Robert Dale, McLean, Va., pileated woodpecker. 



Grimmer, J. Lear, Washington, D.C., 14 West Indian anoles, 2 fence 

 lizards, higatee turtle, 5 Grand Cayman water snakes, lazy snake, 

 Grand Cayman racer. 



Hagen, Clemens O., Fairfax, Va., double yellow-headed parrot. 



Harman, Mrs. Ann, Washington, D.C., Asiatic quail. 



Hemba, Alton W., U.S. Consul General, Guayaquil, Ecuador, Gala- 

 pagos tortoise. 



Keefer, Lonny, Mt. Rainier, Md., canyon tree frog. 



Keese, Robert, Rockville, Md., boa constrictor. 



Lakigh, George, Jacksonville Beach, Fla., 3 natterjack toads, 2 green 

 toads, sand lizard. 



Locke, Otto Martin, New Braunfels, Tex., 8 collared lizards, 3 Texas 

 alligator lizards, 25 blue spiny lizards, prairie kingsnake, Great 

 Plains rat snake, Texas lined snake, eastern hog-nosed snake, eastern 

 black-necked garter snake. 



Malone, Col., U.S. Army, Arlington, Va., 5 chameleons. 



Marcus, Dr. Leonard, Washington, D.C., 2 scorpions, whiptail, 2 

 western swifts. 



Martin, James, Norfolk, Va., 2 water moccasins. 



Martin, W. H., Leesburg, Va., slender glass lizard, peninsula cooter. 



May, Lonnie G., Laurel, Md., timber rattlesnake. 



McCrae, Glen, Littleton, Colo., bullsnake, Sonora gopher snake, 

 western milk snake, California striped racer, Great Basin gopher 

 snake. 



McGreevy, Dr. J., Arlington, Va., coatimundi. 



Meckstroth, Lt. Col. L. E., Davidsonville, Md., red-headed conure. 



Miller, Miss Christine, Bethesda, Md., civet. 



Morrison, Mrs. A., Washington, D.C, double yellow-headed parrot. 



Murphy, Miss Gwen, Arlington, Va., half-moon conure. 




164 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



National Aquarium, Dept. of Commerce, Washington, D.C., piranha, 



2 diamond-backed terrapins. 

 Pohlman, Gunther, Neuwied/Rhn., West Germany, 22 newts. 

 Preston, Mrs. Lois, Riverdale, Md., Chinese macaque. 

 Quinlan, Mr. G. J., Washington, D.C., squirrel monkey. 

 Ragan, Miss Donna, Washington, D.C., 18 western painted turtles. 

 Reeves, Mrs. Clyde P., Arlington, Va., lesser hill mynah. 

 Rider, V. D., Warrenton, Va., alligator. 

 Ripley, S. Dillon, Washington, D.C., rosy-billed pochard, 2 falcated 



teal. 

 Robey, Mrs. R. W., Silver Spring, Md., weeping capuchin. 

 Robinson, Mrs. William S., Seat Pleasant, Md., ocelot. 

 Ronningen, Miss Karen, McLean, Va., white-winged parakeet. 

 Rowan, Mrs. Michael B., Silver Spring, Md., 2 Texas tortoises. 

 Schwartzbeck, Donald F., Washington, D.C., snapping turtle 



(32 lbs.). 

 Scott, James F., Falls Church, Va., pig-tailed macaque. 

 Seibel, Hilda, Chevy Chase, Md., cockatiel. 

 Sharpe, Brian, and Ereckson, Willard, Washington, D.C., European 



racer. 

 Smith, Mrs. J. B., Arlington, Va., peach-faced lovebird. 

 Smith, Mr. and Mrs. Ray, Falls Church, Va., western flying squirrel, 



Abyssinian cavy. 

 Smithsonian Institution, Division of Birds, Washington, D.C., 3 



sooty terns, 6 Laysan albatrosses, 6 black-footed albatrosses. 

 Stack, Dick, Linthicum Heights, Md., diamondback terrapin. 

 Terborgh, Dr. John, College Park, Md., New Guinea tree snake. 

 Teschan, Lt. Col. P. E., Chevey Chase, Md., Florida king snake. 

 Teunis, Mrs. Elizabeth, Washington, D.C., red-and-blue macaw. 

 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Cambridge, Md., 2 whistling swans. 

 Washington, H., Washington, D.C., American bittern. 

 Webb, Vick, Alexandria, Va., sulphur-breasted toucan. 

 Williams, Mrs. Nellie, Hyattsville, Md., lesser hill mynah. 

 Winn, Col. C. G., McLean, Va., white-handed gibbon. 



EXCHANGES 



The National Zoological Park participates in a continuing program 

 of exchanging surplus animals with other zoos. This year Leonard, 

 a young male gorilla born in the Zoo, was sent to Riverside Park Zoo 

 in Toronto, Canada, in exchange for a 10-year-old male prangutan, 

 a proven sire. Archie, the new orangutan, is being introduced to 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 165 



the Zoo's two females, and it is hoped that eventually young ones 

 will be born here. The National Zoo has bred gorillas, chimpanzees, 

 and gibbons, but never orangs. 



Through the offices of U.S. Senator Karl Mundt, the Zoo received 

 3 pairs of ring-necked pheasants from South Dakota. In exchange 

 a hybrid macaque and 2 parrots were sent to the Great Plains Zoo 

 in Sioux Falls, S. Dak. 



Animals obtained through exchange were: 

 Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum, Tucson, Ariz., 2 elf owls. 

 Baltimore Zoo, Baltimore, Md., elephant trunk snake. 

 Calgary Zoo, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, 2 American martens, 1 



coyote, 1 coatimundi, 1 lynx. 

 Cheyenne Mountain Zoo, Colorado Springs, Colo., 1 musang. 

 Crowder, R. L., Stuart, Fla., 1 pygmy rattlesnake, 1 indigo snake. 

 El Pinar Zoo, Caracas, Venezuela, 2 troupials, 2 blue tanagers, 2 



brown tanagers, 15 saffron finches, 10 scarlet ibises. 

 Gans, Carl, Buffalo, N.Y., 1 saw-scale viper. 

 George's Pet Shop, Hyattsville, Md., 2 South American foxes, 1 tayra, 



1 rhinoceros iguana, 1 Indian otter, 1 South American green lizard, 



1 capybara, 1 golden tamandua, 2 speckled agoutis, 2 caimans, 



1 14%-foot anaconda. 



Honolulu Zoo, Honolulu, Hawaii, 1 Nene goose. 



Kerfess, Cdr., John F., Alexandria, Va. Mohave diamondback rattle- 

 snake, 2 banded geckos, 2 faded snakes. 



Memphis Zoo, Memphis, Tenn., 1 African porcupine. 



Portland Zoo, Portland, Oreg., 7 California ground squirrels. 



Rider, V. D., Warrenton, Va., 2 siamangs, 3 blood pythons, 1 gila 

 monster, 1 beaded lizard, 1 galago. 



San Antonio Zoo, San Antonio, Tex., 4 scaled quail, 2 roadrunners, 



2 wattled guans, 3 roseate spoonbills, 5 Cuban flamingos, 2 glossy 

 ibis, 2 green-winged teal, 2 least tinamous. 



San Diego Zoo, San Diego, Calif., 4 double-yellow-headed parrots, 2 



white-fronted Amazon parrots, 2 yellow-winged lorikeets, 1 eclectus 



parrot, 4 Beebe parakeets, 2 lorikeets. 

 Southeast Pet Shop, Washington, D.C., 2 rhesus monkeys, 1 sooty 



mangabey. 

 Tote-Em-In Zoo, Wilmington, N.C., 2 brown water snakes, 2 house 



snakes, 2 green chicken snakes, 1 canebrake rattlesnake, 1 Nile 



crocodile, 1 European badger. 



The following animals were sent to other zoos and to private col- 

 lectors in exchange: 

 Alipore Zoo, Calcutta, India, 1 pair red-and-blue macaws, 1 pair blue- 



and-gold macaws, 1 pair red, blue, and yellow macaws, 6 pairs wood 




166 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



ducks, 2 pairs Canada geese, 2 Mexican beaded lizards, 2 gila mon- 

 sters, 4 caimans. 



Baltimore Zoo, Baltimore, Md., 1 king cobra, 3 baby anacondas. 



Bates Wood Zoo, New London, Conn., 1 European brown bear cub. 



Buffalo Zoo, Buffalo, N.Y., 2 water civets. 



Chicago Zoo, Brookfield, 111., 4 baby anacondas. 



Cincinnati Zoo, Cincinnati, Ohio, 2 llamas. 



Cleveland Zoo, Cleveland, Ohio, 4 prairie dogs, 1 kookaburra. 



Crowder, R. L., Stuart, Fla., 1 baby anaconda. 



Department of Recreation and Parks, Richmond, Va., 2 peacocks. 



Detroit Zoo, Royal Oak, Mich., 1 Morelett's crocodile. 



Edinburg Zoo, Edinburg, Scotland, 4 raccoons, 19 chipmunks. 



Griffin, James, Key Biscayne, Fla., 4 pairs wood ducks. 



Lincoln Park Zoo, Chicago, 111., 4 blossom-headed parakeets. 



London Zoo, London, England, 1 coatimundi. 



Palmer, Harold C, Douglasville, Ga., 1 American bison, 1 white fallow 

 deer, 2 aoudads, 1 chimpanzee, 1 leopard, 1 Patagonian cavy, 2 ar- 

 madillos, 1 douroucouli monkey, 1 black swan, 2 caimans, 3 boa 

 constrictors, 1 regal python, 4 snapping turtles. 



Philadelphia Zoo, Philadelphia, Pa., 1 woolly monkey. 



Portland Zoo, Portland, Oreg., 5 baby anacondas, 2 blossom-headed 

 parakeets. 



Pretoria Zoo, Pretoria, South Africa, 4 flying squirrels, 6 chipmunks. 



Rider, V. D., Warrenton, Va., 1 chimpanzee, 1 black leopard. 



San Antonio Zoo, San Antonio, Tex., 2 llamas, 2 dorcas gazelles. 



Topeka Zoo, Topeka, Kans., 2 baby anacondas. 



Tote-Em-In-Zoo, Wilmington, N.C., 2 spider monkeys, 4 capuchin 

 monkeys, 9 rhesus monkeys, 2 sooty mangabeys, 2 green monkeys, 

 3 Pekin ducks, 15 copperheads, 53 water moccasins, 4 American 

 alligators, 1 timber rattlesnake, 25 western diamondback rattlesnakes. 



STATUS OF THE COLLECTION, June 30, 1965 



Class 



Mammals 



Birds 



Reptiles 



Amphibians 



Fishes 



Arthropods 



Mollusks 



Total 50 171 929 2,628 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 167 



In the following lists of mammals and birds, sex is given where 

 known; 1.0 indicates one male, 0.1 indicates one female, 1.1 indicates 

 one male and one female. 



ANIMALS IN THE COLLECTION ON JUNE 30, 1965 



MAMMALS 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Marsupialia 

 Didelphidae: 



Common opossum Didelphis marsupialis 8 



Phalangeridae: 



Sugar glider Petaurus breviceps 0.1 



Squirrel glider Petaurus norfolcensis 1.2 



Phascolomidae: 



Hairy-nosed wombat .... Lasiorhinus latifrons 2.0 



Mainland wombat Phascolomis hirsutus 0.1 



Macropodidae: 

 Rat kangaroo Potorous tridactylus 1.3 



Insectivora 

 Tenrecidae: 



Common tenrec Tenrec ecaudatus 5 



Streaked tenrec Hemicentetes sp 4.2 



Erinaceidae: 

 European hedgehog .... Erinaceus europaeus 1 .0 



Chiroptera 

 Pteropodidae: 



Giant fruit bat Pteropus giganteus 3.4 



Primates 

 Lemuridae: 



Ring- tailed lemur Lemur catta 1.2 



Brown lemur Lemur fulvus 1.0 



Lorisidae: 



TickelPs slow loris Nycticebus coucang tenasserimensis . . 0.1 



Great galago Galago crassicaudatus 0.1 



Bushbaby Galago senegalensis z ain -zibaricus . . 2.1 



Common potto Perodicticus potto 0.1 




168 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Cebidae: 



Douroucouli, or night monkey . Aotus trivirgatus 1.1 



Red uakari Cacajao rubicundus 1.1 



White-faced saki monkey . . Pithecia pithecia 1.1 



Capuchin Cebus capucinus 2.5 



Weeping capuchin Cebus griseus 2.0 



Squirrel monkey Saimiri sciureus 2.4 



Black spider monkey .... Ateles fusciceps 5 



Spider monkey Ateles geojfroyi 6 



Woolly monkey Lagothrix sp 1.2 



Callithricidae: 



Pygmy marmoset Cebuella pygmaea 4 



Geoffroy's marmoset .... Oedipomidas spixi 1.1 



Cottontop marmoset .... Saguinus oedipus 1.1 



Hybrid marmoset S. midasXS. oedipus 1.0 



Moustached tamarin .... Saguinus mystax 1.1 



Cercopithecidae : 



Toque, or bonnet monkey . . Macaca sinica 1.1 



Philippine macaque .... Macaca philippinensis 1.0 



Crab-eating macaque .... Macaca irus 0.1 



Hybrid macaque M. philippinensis XM. irus .... 1.0 



Pig-tailed macaque Macaca nemestrina 0.1 



Chinese macaque Macaca lasiotis 0.2 



Rhesus monkey Macaca mulatta 3.3 



Formosan monkey Macaca cyclopis 1.1 



Red-faced macaque .... Macaca speciosa 0.1 



Wander oo, or lion-tailed Macaca silenus 1.1 



monkey. 



Barbary ape Macaca sylvanus 20 



Moor macaque Macaca maurus 1.2 



Crested macaque, or Celebes Cynopithecus niger 1.0 



ape. 



Gray-cheeked mangabey . . Cercocebus albigena 0.1 



Agile mangabey Cercocebus galeritus 1.0 



Golden-bellied mangabey . . Cercocebus g. chrysogaster 1.0 



Red-crowned mangabey . . . Cercocebus torquatus 1.1 



Sooty mangabey Cercocebus Juliginosus 4.2 



Crested mangabey Cercocebus aterrimus 2.1 



Drill Mandrillus leucophaeus 1.0 



Olive baboon Papio anubis 3.2 



Chacma baboon Papio comatus 1.0 



Gelada baboon Theropithecus gelada 3.4 



Vervetguenon Cercopithecus aethiops 2.5 



Grivet guenon, color variant . Cercopithecus aethiops 0.1 



Hybrid guenon, color variant . C. a. pygerythrus X C. a. aethiops . 2 



Moustached monkey .... Cercopithecus cephus 1.2 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 



169 



Family and common name Scientific name 



Diana monkey Cercopithecus diana . . . 



Roloway monkey Cercopithecus diana roloway . 



DeBrazza's guenon Cercopithecus neglectus . . 



White-nosed guenon .... Cercopithecus nictitans . . 



Allen's swamp monkey . . . Allenopithecus nigroviridis . 



Patas monkey Erythrocebus sp 



Dusky langur Presbytis obscurus . . . . 



Langur Presbytis entellus . . . . 



Crested entellus Presbytis cristatus . . . . 



Pongidae: 



White-handed gibbon .... Hylobates lar 



Wau-wau gibbon Hylobates moloch 



Hybrid gibbon H. lar X H. sp 



Siamang gibbon Symphalangus syndactylus . 



Borean orangutan Pongo pygmaeus 



Sumatran orangutan .... Pongo pygmaeus abelii . . . 



Chimpanzee Pan satyrus 



Lowland gorilla Gorilla gorilla 



Number 

 1.0 

 0.1 

 1.0 

 0.1 

 1.1 

 1.0 

 1.0 

 0.1 

 1.0 



1.0 

 0.1 

 0.4 

 2.0 

 0.1 

 2.1 

 3.1 

 2.2 



Edentata 

 Myrmecophagidae: 



Giant anteater Myrmecophaga tridactyla . 



Tamandua, or collared ant- Tamandua tetradactyla . 



eater. 

 Bradypodidae: 



Two-toed sloth Choloepus didactylus . . 



Dasypodidae: 



Nine-banded armadillo . . . Dasypus novemcinctus . . 



0.1 

 3.0 



8 

 1.1 



Sciuridae: 



European red squirrel . . 

 Gray squirrel, albino . . 

 Western fox squirrel . . 

 Southern fox squirrel . . 

 Tricolored squirrel . . . 

 Formosan tree squirrel . . 

 Woodchuck, or groundhog 



Hoary marmot 



Prairie-dog 



California ground squirrel 

 Washington ground squirrel 

 Antelope ground squirrel 

 Golden-mantled ground 



squirrel. 

 Round-tailed ground squirrel 



RODENTIA 



Sciurus vulgaris . . . 



Sciurus carolinensis . . 



Sciurus niger . . . . 



Sciurus niger . . . . 



Callosciurus prevosti . 

 Callosciurus erythraeus . 



Marmota monax . . 



Marmota caligata . . 



Cynomys ludovicianus . 



Citellus beecheyi . . . 



Citellus washingtoni . 



Citellus sp 



Citellus lateralis . . . 



Citellus tereticaudus 



1.1 



0.2 

 1.0 

 0.1 

 0.1 

 1.1 

 0.1 

 1.1 

 28 

 0.2 

 0.1 

 1.0 

 0.1 



1.0 




170 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name 



Scientific name 



Eastern chipmunk Tamias striatus . 



Eastern chipmunk, albino . . Tamias striatus . 



Yellow pine chipmunk .... Eutamias amoenus 



Siebold's chipmunk Eutamias sibiricus 



Eastern flying squirrel . . . Glaucomys volans 

 Heteromyidae: 



Kangaroo rat Dipodomys sp 



Castoridae: 



Beaver Castor canadensis 



Pedetidae: 



Cape jumping hare Pedetes capensis . 



Cricetidae: 



Fat-tailed gerbil . . . 



White-footed mouse 



East African maned rat 

 Muridae: 



Egyptian spiny mouse . 



Egyptian spiny mouse . 



Negev spiny mouse . . 



Giant forest rat . . . 



Slender-tailed cloud rat 

 Gliridae: 



Garden dormouse 

 Hystricidae: 



Cavia porcellus . . 

 Dolichotis patagonum 



African porcupine 



Brush-tailed porcupine 



Palawan porcupine . 

 Cavidae: 



Abyssinian guinea pig 



Patagonian cavy . . 

 Dasyproctidae: 



Hairy-rumped agouti 



Speckled agouti . . 



Acouchy 



Chinchillidae: 



Mountain viscacha . 

 Hy drochoeridae : 



Capybara Hydrochoerus hydrochaerus . . 



Pachyuromys duprasi 

 Peromyscus sp . . 

 Lophiomys ibeanus . 



Acomys cahirinus 

 Acomys dimidiatus . 

 Acomys sp . . . . 

 Cricetomys gambianus 

 Phloeomys cumingii 



Eliomys quercinus 



Hystrix cristata . 

 Atherurus sp . . 

 Thecurus pumilus 



Dasyprocta prymnolopha 

 Dasyprocta punctata . 

 Myoprocta acouchy . . 



Lagidium sp. 



Carnivora 

 Canidae: 



Dingo Canis familiaris dingo 



Coyote Canis latrans . . . , 



Common jackal Canis aureus . . . , 



Timber wolf Canis lupus . . . . 



1.2 

 1.0 

 1.0 

 1.1 



2.2 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 171 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Texas red wolf Cards niger rufus 0.1 



Fennec Fennecus zerda 1.1 



Gray fox Urocyon cinereoargenteus 1.2 



Red fox Vulpes fulva 1.0 



Raccoon dog Nyctereutes procyonoides 0.1 



South American fox .... Dusicyon culpaeus 1.1 



Small-eared dog Atelocynus microtis 1.1 



Cape hunting dog Lycaon pictus 1.1 



Ursidae: 



Spectacled bear Tremarctos ornatus 1.0 



Himalayan bear Selenarctos thibetanus 0.1 



Japanese black bear .... Selenarctos t. japonicus 1.0 



Korean bear Selenarctos t. ussuricus 1.1 



European brown bear .... Ursus arctos 2.2 



Iranian brown bear .... Ursus arctos 1.1 



Grizzly bear Ursus horribilis 1.1 



Kodiak bear Ursus middendorffi 1.0 



Black bear Euarctos americanus 1.1 



Polar bear Thalarctos maritimus 1.2 



Hybrid bear Thalarctos maritimus X Ursus 2.1 



middendorffi. 



Malay sun bear Helarctos malayanus 0.2 



Sloth bear Melursus ursinus 1.1 



Procyonidae: 



Cacomistle Bassariscus astutus 1.1 



Raccoon Procyon lotor 0.1 



Raccoon, albino Procyon lotor 0.1 



Raccoon, black phase .... Procyon lotor 1.0 



Coatimundi Nasua nasua 2.2 



Peruvian coatimundi .... Nasua n. dorsalis 1.2 



Kinkajou Potos flavus 2.1 



Olingo Bassaricyon gabbi 1.1 



Mustelidae: 



Fisher Martes pennanti 0.1 



Marten Martes americana 1.2 



Yellow- throated marten . . . Martes fiavigula henrici 1.1 



British Guiana tayra .... Tayra barbara poliocephala .... 1.1 



Grison Gallictis allimandi 1.0 



Zorilla Ictonyx striatus 1.0 



Wolverine Gulo gulo 0.1 



Ratel Mellivora capensis 1.0 



Eurasian, or common badger. Meles meles 0.1 



Golden-bellied ferret badger . Melogale moschata 1.1 



Common skunk Mephitis mephitis 0.1 



River otter Lutra canadensis 2.0 




172 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name 



Viverridae: 



Genet Genetta genetta 



Formosan spotted civet . . . Viverricula indica . . . 



Linsang Prionodon linsang . . . 



African palm civet Nandinia binotata . . . 



Masked civet Paguma larvata .... 



Binturong Arctictis binturong . . . 



African water civet Atilax paludinosus . . . 



Cusimanse Crossarchus fasciatus . . 



White-tailed mongoose . . . Ichneumia albicauda . . 



Black-footed mongoose . . . Bdeogale sp 



Hyaenidae: 



Striped hyena Hyaena hyaena .... 



Felidae: 



Bobcat Lynx rufus 



Canada lynx Lynx canadensis .... 



Jungle cat Felis chaus 



Serval cat Felis serval 



Fishing cat Felis viverrinus .... 



Leopard cat Felis bengalensis . . . 



Golden cat Felis aurata 



Flat-headed cat Felis planiceps 



Ocelot Felis pardalis 



Jaguarondi Felis yagouaroundi . . . 



Puma Felis concolor 



Leopard Panthera pardus .... 



Black leopard Panthera pardus .... 



Lion Panthera leo 



Bengal tiger Panthera tigris .... 



Bengal tiger, white Panthera tigris .... 



Jaguar Panthera onca .... 



Clouded leopard Neojelis nebulosa .... 



Cheetah Acinonyx jubata .... 



PlNNIPEDIA 



Otariidae: 



California sea-lion £alophus californianus 



Patagonian sea-lion Otaria Jlavescens . . . 



Phocidae: 

 Harbor seal Phoca vitulina . . . 



TUBULIDENTATA 



Ory cteropodidae : 



Aardvark Orycteropus qfer 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 173 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Proboscidea 

 Elephantidae: 



African elephant Loxodonta africana 0.1 



Forest elephant Loxodonta cyclotis 1.0 



Indian elephant Elephas maximus 0.2 



Hyracoidea 

 Procaviidae: 



Rock hyrax Procavia capensis 4 



Perissodactyla 



Equidae: 



Mongolian wild horse . . . Equus przewalski 1.0 



Grevy's zebra Equus grevyi 1.2 



Grant's zebra Equus burchelli 1 .4 



Burro Equus asinus 1.1 



Tapiridae: 



Brazilian tapir Tapirus terrestris 1.1 



Rhinocerotidae: 



One-horned Indian rhinoceros . Rhinoceros unicornis 1.1 



African black rhinoceros . . Diceros bicornis 1.1 



White, or square-lipped Ceratotherium simum 1.1 



rhinoceros. 



Artiodagtyla 



Tayassuidae: 



Collared peccary Tayassu tajacu 6.2 



Hippopotamidae : 



Hippopotamus Hippopotamus amphibius 1.2 



Pygmy hippopotamus .... Choeropsis liberiensis 4.5 



Camelidae: 



Arabian camel Camelus dromedarius 1.0 



Bactrian camel Camelus bactrianus 0.1 



Llama Lama glama 1.2 



Alpaca Lama pacos 1.1 



Cervidae: 



Axis deer Axis axis 2.0 



Red deer Cervus elaphus *1.4 



Sika deer Cervus nippon *1.7 



American elk Cervus canadensis *1.0 



Pere David's deer Elaphurus davidianus 1.0 



Forest caribou Rangifer caribou 0.1 



Reindeer Rangifer tarandus 4.10 



Hybrid reindeer R. tarandusXR. caribou 0.1 



*On deposit at another zoo or sanctuary. 




174 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Giraffidae: 



Masai giraffe Giraffa camelopardalis 1.2 



Antilocapridae : 



Pronghorn antelope Antilocapra americana 1.0 



Bovidae: 



Sitatunga Tragelaphus spekii 



Yak Poephagus grunniens 



Gaur Bibos gaurus (one on deposit) . . . 



Cape buffalo Syncerus coffer 



Anoa Anos depressicornis 



Brindled gnu Connochaetes taurinus 



Maxwell's duiker Cephalophus maxwellii 



Dorcas gazelle Gazella dorcas 



Saiga antelope Saiga tatarica 



Rocky Mountain goat . . . Oreamnos americanus 



Himalayan tahr Hemitragus jemlahicus 



African pygmy goat .... Capra hircus 



Ibex Capra ibex 



Aoudad Ammotragus lervia 



Bighorn sheep Ovis canadensis 



Dall sheep Ovis dalli 



BIRDS 



Sphenisciformes 

 Spheniscidae: 



King penguin Aptenodytes patagonica 



Adelie penguin Pygoscelis adeliae 



Struthioniformes 

 Struthionidae: 



Ostrich Struthio camelus 



Rheiformes 

 Rheidae: 



Common Rhea Rhea americana 



Casuariiformes 

 Casuariidae: 



Double-wattled cassowary . . Casuarius bicarunculatus 

 Dromiceiidae: 

 Emu Dromiceius novaehollandiae 



*On deposit at another zoo or sanctuary. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 175 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



TlNAMIFORMES 



Tinamidae: 



Spotted tinamou Nothura maculosa 1 



Tataupa tinamou Crypturellus tataupa 1 



Procellariiformes 

 Diomedeidae: 



Black-footed albatross .... Diomedea nigripes 1 



Peleganiformes 

 Pelecanidae: 



Old world white pelican . . Pelecanus onocrotalus 2.2 



American white pelican . . . Pelecanus erythrorhynchos 2 



Brown pelican Pelecanus occidentalis 1 



Dalmatian pelican Pelecanus crispus 2 



Phalacrocor acidae : 



Double-crested cormorant . . Phalacrocorax auritus 3 



Great cormorant Phalacrocorax carbo 5 



ClCONIIFORMES 



Ardeidae: 



Common egret Casmerodius albus 7 



Black-crowned night heron . Nycticorax nycticorax 11 



American bittern Botaurus lentiginosus 1 



Bare-throated tiger bittern . . Tigrisoma mexicanum 1 



Balaenicipitidae: 



Shoebill Balaeniceps rex 0.1 



Ciconiidae: 



American wood ibis .... Mycteria americana 1 



White stork Ciconia ciconia 2 



White-bellied stork Sphenorhynchus abdimii 1 



Black-necked stork Xenorhynchus asiaticus 1.1 



Painted stork Ibis leucocephalus 1 



Threskiornithidae: 



White ibis Eudocimus albus 3 



Scarlet ibis Eudocimus ruber 11 



Black-faced ibis Theristicus caudatus 1 



Glossy ibis Plegadis falcinellus 5 



Black-headed ibis Threskiornis melanocephala .... 1 



Roseate spoonbill Ajaia ajaja 3 



Phoenicopteridae: 



Chilean flamingo Phoenicopterus chilensis 1 



Greater flamingo Phoenicopterus ruber 3.3 



Greater flamingo Phoenicopterus ruber roseus 1 




176 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Anseriformes 

 Anhimidae: 



Crested screamer Chauna torquata 3 



Black-necked screamer . . . . Chauna chavaria 1.1 



Anatidae: 



Coscoroba swan Coscoroba coscoroba 



Mute swan Cygnus olor 



Black-necked swan Cygnus melancoriphus 



Whistling swan Cygnus columbianus 



Whooping swan Olor cygnus 



Trumpeter swan Olor buccinator 



Black swan Cygnus atratus 



Egyptian goose Alopochen aegyptiacus 



White-fronted goose .... Anser albifrons 



Bar-headed goose Anser indicus 



Emperor goose Anser canagicus 



Snow goose Anser caerulescens 



Snow goose, blue phase . . . Anser caerulescens 



Ross's snow goose Anser rossii 



Nene, or Hawaiian goose . . Bratita sandvicensis 



Red-brested goose Branta ruficollis 



Canada goose Branta canadensis 



Canada goose X snow goose, Branta canadensis X Anser caerulescens . 

 hybrid. 



Canada goose Branta canadensis parvipes 



Canada goose Branta canadensis maxima 



Canada goose Branta canadensis minima 



Fulvous tree duck Dendrocygna bicolor 



Wood duck Aix sponsa 



Mandarin duck Aix galericulata 



Common pintail Anas acuta 



Green-winged teal Anas crecca 



Chestnut-brested teal .... Anas castanea 



European widgeon or Anas penelope 



baldpate. 



American widgeon Anas americana 



Spot-billed duck Anas poecilorhyncha 



Mallard Anas platyrhynchos 



American black duck .... Anas rubripes 



Philippine duck Anas luzonica 



Greater scaup Aythya marila 



Lesser scaup Aythya qffinis 



Ring-necked duck Aythya collaris 



Rosy-billed pochard .... Netta peposaca 



Red-crested pochard .... Netta rufina 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 



177 



Family and common name Scientific name 



Comb duck Sarkidiornis melanotos 



Ruddy shelduck Tadorna jerruginea . . 



Falconiformes 



Cathartidae: 



Andean condor Vultur gryphus . . . 



King vulture Sarcoramphus papa . . 



Sagittariidae: 



Secretary bird Sagittarius serpentarius 



Accipitridae: 



Hooded vulture Necrosyrtes monachus . 



Griffon vulture Gypsjuluus .... 



Ruppell's vulture Gyps ruppellii . . . 



Red- tailed hawk Buteo jamaicensis . . 



Swainson's hawk Buteo swainsoni . . . 



Red-shouldered hawk .... Buteo lineatus . . . 



Ornate hawk-eagle Spizjaetus ornatus. . . 



Long-crested hawk-eagle . . Lophaetus occipitalis . 



Golden eagle Aquila chrysaetos. . . 



Imperial eagle Aquila heliaca . . . 



White-bellied sea eagle . . . Haliaeetus leucogaster . 



Pallas' s fishing eagle Haliaeetus leucoryphus 



Bald eagle Haliaeetus leucocephalus 



Bateleur eagle Terathopius ecaudatus 



Lammergeier, or bearded 

 vulture. 

 Falconidae: 



American kestrel or American 



sparrowhawk. 

 Peregrine falcon or duckhawk 

 Eleonora's falcon . . 

 Red-footed falcon . . 

 Feilden's falconet . . 

 Collared forest falcon 

 Crested caracara . . 

 White-throated caracara 



Gypaetus barbatus 



Falco sparverius 



Falco peregrinus . . . 

 Falco eleonorae . . . 

 Falco vespertinus . . . 

 Keohierax insignis . . 

 Micrastur semitorquatus 

 Polyborus plancus . . 

 Phalcoboenus albogularis 



Galliformes 

 Megapodiidae: 



Brush turkey Alectura lathami . . 



Cracidae: 

 Red-wattled curassow .... Crax globulosa . . 



Crested guan Penelope purpurascens 



White-crested piping guan . . Pipile cumanensis . 

 789-427—66 23 



Number 

 2.2 

 3.3 



1.0 



2 



1.1 



1 



1 

 1 

 1 

 1 

 1 

 1 

 1 

 5 

 2 

 1 

 1 

 7 

 1 

 1 



0.1 



1 

 1 

 1 

 0.1 

 2 

 2 

 1 



1 



1.1 



1.0 

 2.0 




178 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Phasianidae: 



Common quail Coturnix coturnix 0.1 



Rain quail Coturnix coromandelica 8 



Scaled quail Callipepla squamata 4 



Gambel's quail Lophortyx gambeli 1.0 



California quail Lophortyx calif ornicus 1 



Argus pheasant Argusianus argus 1.0 



Golden pheasant Chrysolophus pictus . 0.1 



Black-breasted Kalij pheasant . Lophura leucomelana 1.1 



Silver pheasant Lophura nycthemera 1.0 



Ring-necked pheasant .... Phasianus colchicus 6.4 



Blue-eared pheasant Crossoptilon auritum 1.0 



Napoleon peacock-pheasant . Polyplectron emphanum 1.1 



Gray, or chinquis peacock- Polyplectron bicalcaratum *1.1 



pheasant. 



Indian peafowl Pavo cristatus 3.3 



Red jungle fowl Gallus gallus 1.0 



Chukar Alectoris chukar 1.1 



Painted partridge Francolinus pictus 1.0 



Island chukar gray partridge . Francolinus pondicerianus 1.1 



Greek chukar black wood Melanoperdix nigra 3.2 



partridge. 

 Numididae: 



Vulturine guinea fowl .... Acryllium vulturinum 0.1 



Gruiformes 

 Gruidae: 



Asiatic white crane Grus leucogeranus 1 



Sandhill crane Grus canadensis 6 



Common crane Grus grus 1.1 



Sarus crane Grus antigone 1 



Crowned crane Balearica pavonina 7 



Demoiselle crane Anthropoides virgo 4 



Psophiidae: 



White-winged trumpeter . . . Psophia leucoptera 1.1 



Rallidae: 



Cayenne wood rail Aramides cajanea 3 



White-throated crake .... Laterallus albigularis 1 



Common gallinule Gallinula chloropus 6 



Purple gallinule Porphyrula martinica 1 



Eurypygidae: 



Sun bittern Eurypyga helias 1 



Cariamidae: 



Crested seriama Cariama cristata 1 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 179 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Otididae: 



Kori bustard Ardeotis kori 2.0 



Senegal bustard Eupodotis senegalensis 1.0 



Charadriiformes 

 Jacanidae: 



Pheasant-tailed jacana . . . Hydrophasianus chirurgus 1 



Charadriidae: 



Banded plover ^pnifer tricolor 2 



American golden plover . . . Pluvialis dominica 1 



Southern lapwing Belonopterus chilensis 4 



Glareolidae: 



Egyptian plover Pluvianus aegyptius 6 



Recurvirostridae: 



Black-necked stilt Himantopus mexicanus 1 



Laridae: 



Ring-billed gull Larus delawarensis 3 



Laughing gull Larus atricilla 3 



Silver gull Larus novaehollandiae 4 



Sooty tern Sterna fuse ata 5 



Inca tern Larosterna inca 2 



COLUMBIFORMES 



Columbidae: 



Speckled pigeon Columba guinea 1 



Band-tailed pigeon Columba fasciata 2 



Green imperial pigeon . . . Ducula aenea 1 



Crested bronze-wing pigeon . Ocyphaps lophotes 4 



Orange-breasted green pigeon . Treron bicincta 0.2 



Common bronze-wing pigeon . Phaps chalcoptera 2 



Blue ground dove Claravis pretiosa 1.1 



Ruddy ground dove .... Columbigallina talpacoti 1 



Emerald dove Chalcophaps indica 1 



Ringed turtle dove Streptopelia risoria 5 



Mourning dove ^enaidura macroura 7 



PsiTTACIFORMES 



Psittacidae: 



Kea Nestor notabilis 1.0 



Black cockatoo Calyptorhynchus magnificus 1 .0 



Solomon Islands cockatoo . . Kakatoe ducrops *1 



Sulphur-crested cockatoo . . Kakatoe galerita 2 



Bare-eyed cockatoo Kakatoe sanguinea 1 



Rose-crested cockatoo .... Kakatoe moluccensis 1 



Leadbeater's cockatoo . . . Kakatoe leadbeateri 4 



Cockatiel Nymphicus hollandicus 1.2 




180 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name 

 Yellow and blue macaw . . 

 Red-and-green macaw. . . 



Scarlet macaw 



Red-and-blue macaw . . . 

 Cherry-headed conure parrot 

 Brown-throated conure . . 



Petz's conure 



Dusky-headed conure . . . 

 Nanday or blackheaded 



conure. 



Chilean conure 



Yellow-winged conure . . . . 



Monk parakeet 



Double-yellow-headed 



Amazon parrot. 

 Single-yellow-headed Amazon 



parrot. 

 Yellow-naped Amazon parrot. 

 Yellow-fronted Amazon 



parrot. 

 Red-lored Amazon parrot . . 

 White-fronted Amazon parrot . 

 Festive Amazon parrot . . . 

 Black-headed caique . . . . 

 Budgerigar or warbling grass 



parakeet. 

 Blue-rumped parrotlet 

 Princess parrot .... 

 Rosy-faced lovebird 

 African grey parrot . . 

 Red-sided eclectus parrot 

 Alexandrine parakeet . 

 Rose-ringed parakeet . 

 Moustached parakeet . , 

 Blossom-headed parakeet 

 Blue-winged parakeet . . 



Scientific name 



Ara ararauna . . . 

 Ara chloroptera . . 

 Ara macao .... 

 Ara maracana . . 

 Aratinga erythrogenys 

 Aratinga pertinax . 

 Aratinga canicularis 

 Aratinga weddellii . 

 Nandayus nanday . 



Microsittacae ferruginea 

 Brotogeris versicolurus 

 Myiopsitta monachus . 

 Amazona ochrocephala 



Amazona ochrocephala 



Amazona ochrocephala 

 Amazona ochrocephala 



Amazona autumnalis . 

 Amazona albifrons . . 

 Amazona /estiva . . . 

 Pionites melanocephala 

 Melopsittacus undulatus 



Forpus cyanopygius . . 

 Polytelis alexandrae 

 Agapornis roseicollis . 

 Psittacus erithacus . . 

 Lorius roratus . . . 

 Psittacula eupatria . . 

 Psittacula krameri . . 

 Psittacula alexandri. . 

 Psittacula cyanocephala 

 Psittacula columboides 



GUGULIFORMES 



Musophagidae: 



White-bellied go-away bird 

 White-cheeked turaco . . . 

 Purple-crested turaco . . . 

 Cuculidae: 

 Greater roadrunner Geococcyx californianus 



*On deposit at another zoo or sanctuary. 



Corythaixoides leucogaster 

 Tauraco leucotis .... 

 Gallirex porphyreolophus . 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 



Family and common name Scientific name 



Strigiformes 

 Tytonidae: 



Common barn owl Tyto alba .... 



Strigidae: 



Spectacled owl Pulsatrix perspicillata 



Snowy owl Nyctea scandiaca 



Barred owl Strix varia .... 



Brown wood-owl Strix leptogrammica . 



Burrowing owl Speotyto cunicularia 



Eagle owl Bubo bubo .... 



Elf owl Micrathene whitneyi 



181 



Number 



Trochilidae: 



White-throated amazilia 

 hummingbird. 



Coliidae: 

 Red-faced coly . . . 



Apodiformes 



Amazilia amazilia 

 COLIIFORME 



Colius indicus . . 



Momotus momota . . . 

 Baryphthengus ruficapillus 



GORAGIIFORMES 



Alcedinidae: 



Kookaburra or laughing Dacelo gigas . . 



jackass. 

 White-breasted kingfisher . . Halcyon smyrnensis 



Momotidae: 



Blue-crowned motmot 



Great rufous motmot , 

 Coraciidae: 



Lilac-breasted roller .... Coracias caudata 



Indian roller Coracias benghalensis 



Bucerotidae: 



Concave-casqued, or great Buceros bicornis . . 



pied, hornbill. 



Indian pied hornbill 



Malabar pied hornbill 



Wrinkled hornbill. . 

 Wreathed hornbill . 

 Yellow-billed hornbill 

 Abyssinian ground hornbill 

 Leadbeater's ground hornbill 



Anthracoceros malabaricus 



Anthracoceros coronatus . 



Rhyticeros corrugatus . . 



Rhyticeros undulatus . . 



Tockus fiavirostris . . . 



Bucorvus abyssinicus . . 



Bucorvus leadbeateri . . 



13 



1 

 1 



2 

 2 



•1.1 



2 

 1 

 1 

 0.1 

 0.1 

 1.1 

 1.0 




182 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



PlCIFORMES 



Capitonidae: 



Lineated barbet Megalaima lineata 3 



Great hill barbet Megalaima vixens 1 



Ramphastidae: 



Swainson's toucan Ramphastos swainsonii 0.1 



Keel-billed toucan Ramphastos sulfuratus 0.1 



Channel-billed toucan . . . Ramphastos vitellinus 0.2 



Razor-billed aracari .... Pteroglossus castanotis 1.0 



Picidae: 



Pileated woodpecker .... Dryocopus pileatus 1 



Passeriformes 

 Cotingidae: 



Peruvian or scarlet cock-of- Rupicola peruviana 1.0 



the-rock. 



Tyrannidae: 



Kiskadee Pitangus sulphuratus 3 



Dicruridae: 



Greater racket-tailed drongo . Dicrurus paradiseus 3 



Oriolidae: 



Maroon oriole Oriolus trailli 0.1 



Corvidae: 



Magpie-jay Calocitta formosa 1 



Green jay Cyanocorax yncas 3 



Violaceus jay Cyanocorax violaceus 4 



San Bias jay Cissilopha sanblasiana 2 



Bushy-crested jay Cissilopha melanocyanea 1 



Himalayan tree pie Dendrocitta Jormosae 1 



Common jay Garrulus glandarius 1 



Blue jay Cyanocitta cristata 1 



Hunting cissa Cissa chinensis 6 



Red-billed blue magpie . . . Urocissa erythrorhyncha 3 



Formosan blue pie Urocissa caerulea 8 



Pied crow Corvus albus 2 



Common raven Corvus corax 2 



Paridae: 



Great tit Parus major 1 



Timaliidae: 



Slaty-headed scimitar babbler . Pomatorhinus schisticeps 1 



White-crested laughing thrush. Garrulax leucolophus 4 



Necklaced laughing thrush . . Garrulax monileger 2 



Nilgiri or rufous-breasted, Garrulax cachinnans 2 



laughing thrush. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 



183 



Family and common name 



Scientific name 



Troglodytes troglodytes 



Turdus migratorius .... 

 Turdus migratorius .... 



Turdus viscivorus 



Thamnolaea cinnamomeiventris 

 Copsychus malabaricus .... 

 ^oothera citrina 



Black-capped sibia Heterophasia capistrata 



Silver-eared mesia Leiothrix argentauris . 



Red-billed leiothrix Leiothrix lutea. . . . 



Pycnonotidae: 



Black-headed bulbul .... Pycnonotus atriceps . . 



Red-vented bulbul Pycnonotus cafer . . . 



Red-whiskered bulbul .... Pycnonotus jocosus . . 



White-throated bulbul . . . Criniger Jlaveolus . . 



Irenidae: 



Gold-fronted chloropsis or leaf Chloropsis aurifrons . . 

 bird. 



Troglodytidae: 



Winter wren 



Turdidae: 



American robin 



American robin, albino . . 



Mistle thrush 



Cliff chat 



Shama thrush 



Orange-headed ground 

 thrush. 



Bombycillidae: 



Cedar waxwing 



Sturnidae: 



Rosy pastor 



Purple glossy starling . . . 

 Greater glossy starling . . 



Violet starling 



Jungle mynah 



Hill mynah 



Pied mynah 



Gray-headed mynah . . . 

 Black-headed, or Brahminy, 



mynah. 

 Black-winged mynah . . 

 Common starling .... 

 Rothschild's mynah . . 

 Gold-crested mynah . . 

 Black-bellied glossy starling 



Nectariniidae: 



Tacazze sunbird .... 

 Zosteropidae: 



Oriental white-eye . . . 



Bombycilla cedrorum 



Sturnus roseus . . . . 



Lamprotornis purpureus . 

 Lamprotornis australis 

 Cinnyricinclus leucogaster . 



Acridotheres fuscus . . . 



Gracula religiosa . . . 



Sturnus contra . . . . 



Sturnus malabaricus . . 



Sturnus pagodarum . . . 



Sturnus melanopterus . 

 Sturnus vulgaris . . . 

 Leucopsar rothschildi . 

 Ampeliceps coronatus . 

 Lamprotornis corruscus 



Nectarinia tacazze 



Number 

 1 

 4 

 7 



5 

 4 

 4 



4 



0.1 



4 

 2 

 2 

 2 



2 

 1 

 2 

 2 

 6 



1.0 



fysterops palpebrosa 




184 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Coerebidae: 



Green honeycreeper .... Chlorophanes spiza 0.1 



Purple or yellow-legged Cyanerpes caeruleus 1.0 



honeycreeper. 

 Plocidae: 



Red-collared widowbird . . . Euplectes ardens 3.0 



Jackson's whydah Euplectes jacksoni 1.0 



Masked weaver Ploceus velatus 4.0 



Red bishop bird Euplictes orix 1.0 



Common silverbill or white- Lonchura malabarica 2 



throated Munia. 

 Bengalese finch (domesticated Lonchura striata 1 



form of striated mannikin= 



white-backed Munia). 

 Black-headed Munia or Lonchura malacca 3 



chestnut mannikin. 

 Nutmeg mannikin or spotted Lonchura punctulata 6 



Munia. 



Cut-throat finch Amadina fasciata 2.1 



Strawberry finch Estrilda amandava 3 



Common waxbill Estrilda astrild 1 



Orange-cheeked waxbill . . . Estrilda melpoda 1 



Zebra finch Poephila castanotis 2.1 



Java rice finch Padda oryzivora 11 



Icteridae: 



Troupial Icterus icterus 3 



Yellow-headed marshbird . . Agelaius icterocephalus 1 



Giant cowbird Scaphidura oryzivora 1 



Shiny cowbird Molothrus bonariensis 1 



Colombian red-eyed cowbird . Tangavius armenti 1.0 



Bronzed cowbird Tangavius aenus 1.1 



Brown-headed cowbird . . . Molothrus ater 2 



Red-winged blackbird . . . Agelaius phoeniceus 1 



Purple grackle Quiscalus quiscula 3 



Thraupidae: 



Blue tanager Thraupis virens 



Yellow-rumped tanager . . . Ramphocelus icteronotus 



Masked crimson tanager . . Ramphocelus nigrogularis 



Flame-rumped tanager . . . Ramphocelus flammigerus 



Blue-winged mountain tana- Compsocoma fiavinucha 



ger 

 Boddaert's tanager Tachyphonus rufus 



Fringillidae: 



Black-chinned siskin .... Spinus barbatus 



Screaming seedeater Sporophila caerulescens 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 



185 



Family and common name 

 Ruddy-breasted seedeater 

 Chestnut-bellied seed finch 

 Buff-throated saltator 

 Blue-black grassquit 

 Ortolan bunting . . 

 Red-headed bunting 



Canary 



Yellow-grass finch . 



Scientific name 

 Sporophila minuta . . . 

 Oryzoborus angolinsis . . 

 Saltator maximus . . . 

 Volatinia jacarina . . . 

 Emberiza calandra . . . 

 Emberiza brumiceps . . 

 Serinus canarius .... 

 Sicalis luteola 



Number 

 1.1 

 2 

 2 

 1 

 1 

 1 

 2 

 14 



Alligatoridae: 



Caiman 



Black caiman . . . 

 American alligator . 

 Chinese alligator . . 



Crocodilidae: 

 Broad-nosed crocodile 

 African crocodile . . 

 Narrow-nosed crocodile 

 Salt-water crocodile 

 American crocodile 

 Morelett's crocodile 



Gavialidae: 



REPTILES 



LORICATA 



Caiman sclerops . . . 

 Melanosuchus niger 

 Alligator mississipiensis 

 Alligator sinensis. . . 



Osteolaemus tetraspis . 

 Crocodylus niloticus 

 Crocodylus cataphractus 

 Crocodylus porosus . . 

 Crocodylus acutus . . 

 Crocodylus moreletii 



Indian gavial Gavialis gangeticus 



Chelydridae: 



Snapping turtle 



Alligator snapping turtle . . 

 Kinosternidae: 



Stinkpot 



Mud turtle 



Tropical mud turtle . . . . 



Central American mud turtle. 

 Emydidae: 



Tropical American pointed- 

 nosed turtle. 



Box turtle 



Florida box turtle 



Ornate box turtle 



Kura kura box turtle . . . . 



Diamondback terrapin . . 



Map turtle 



Chelonia 



Chelydra serpentina 

 Macrochelys temminckii 



Sternotherus odoratus . 

 Kinosternon subrubrum 

 Kinosternon spurrelli . 

 Kinosternon cruentatum 



Geoemyda punctuaria 



Terrapene Carolina . . 

 Terrapene c. bauri . . 

 Terrapene ornata ornata 

 Cuora amboinensis . . 

 Malaclemys terrapin . 

 Graptemys geographica 



9 



3 



10 

 2 



2 

 3 

 1 

 1 

 2 

 1 



17 

 1 



4 

 5 

 3 

 1 



75 

 5 

 1 

 3 

 8 

 1 




186 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name 



Barbour's map turtle . 



Mississippi map turtle . 



Painted turtle .... 



Western painted turtle. 



Southern painted turtle 



Cumberland turtle . . 



South American red-lined 

 turtle. 



Yellow-bellied turtle . . . 



Red-eared turtle 



Red-bellied turtle .... 



Gooter 



Peninsula cooter 



Florida red-bellied turtle 



Central American turtle . . 



Cuban water turtle .... 



Higatee turtle 



Chicken turtle 



Spotted turtle 



Wood turtle 



Iberian pond turde .... 



European water terrapin 



European pond turtle . . . 



Blanding's or semibox turtle 



Reeves' turde ...... 



Testudinidae: 



Duncan Island tortoise . . 



Galapagos tortoise .... 



Galapagos tortoise .... 



Giant Aldabra tortoise . . . 



South American tortoise . . 



Star tortoise 



Mountain tortoise 



Texas tortoise 



Soft-shell tortoise 



Pelomedusidae: 



African water turde . . . 



African black mud turtle . . 



Amazon spotted turtle . . 

 Chelydidae: 



South American side-necked 

 turde. 



Australian snake-necked 

 turde. 



Matamata turde 



Small side-necked turde . . 



Scientific name Number 



Graptemys barbouri 4 



Graptemys pseudogeographica kohni 3 



Chrysemys p. picta 10 



Chrysemys p. belli 17 



Chrysemys p. dorsalis 1 



Pseudemys scripta troostii 7 



Pseudemys s. callirostris 2 



Pseudemys s. scripta 18 



Pseudemys s. elegans 36 



Pseudemys rubriventris 6 



Pseudemys floridana 6 



Pseudemys j ". peninsularis 1 



Pseudemys nelsoni 2 



Pseudemys ornata 2 



Pseudemys decussata 1 



Pseudemys rugosa 1 



Deirochelys reticularia 2 



Clemmys guttata 2 



Clemmys insculpta 6 



Clemmys leprosa 5 



Clemmys caspica rivulata 13 



Emys orbicularis 1 



Emys blandingii 2 



Chinemys reevesii 4 



Testudo ephippium 1 



Testudo e. elephantopus 1 



Testudo elephantopus vicina .... 2 



Testudo gigantea 4 



Testudo denticulata 5 



Testudo elegans 5 



Testudo emys 1 



Gopherus berlandieri 1 



Malacochersus tornieri 4 



Pelomedusa sinuata 2 



Pelusios subniger 1 



Podocnemis unifilis 5 



Batrachemys nasuta 1 



Chelodina longicollis 3 



Chelys fimbriata 1 



Hydromedusa iectifera 2 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 187 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Large side-necked turtle . . . Phrynops hilarii 7 



Krefft's turtle Emydura krefftii 3 



Murray turtle Emydura macquarrii 3 



South American gibba turtle . Mesoclemmys gibba 2 



Flat-headed turde Platemys platycephala 1 



Trionychidae: 



Spiny softshell Trionyx ferox 5 



Texas softshell Trionyx f. emoryi 1 



African softshell Trionyx triunguis 2 



Sauria 

 Gekkonidae: 



Tokay gecko Gekko gecko 26 



Day gecko Phelsuma sp 1 



Banded gecko Coleonyx variegatus 2 



Agamidae: 



Agamid lizard Agama stellio 4 



Blood-sucker lizard Calotes versicolor 2 



Iguanidae: 



Common iguana Iguana iguana 7 



Basilisk lizard Basiliscus sp 1 



Rhinoceros iguana Cyclura cornuta 3 



Carolina anole Anolis carolinensis 50 



West Indies anole Anolis conspersus 4 



Fence lizard Sceloporus undulatus 4 



Blue spiny lizard Sceloporus cyanogenys 24 



West Indies fence lizard . . . Leiocephalus varius 1 



Plica lizard Plica plica 1 



Scincidae: 



Mourning skink Egernia luctuosa 2 



White's skink Egernia whitei 1 



Four-lined skink Eumeces tetragrammus 1 



Five-lined skink Eumeces fasciatus 1 



Great Plains skink Eumeces obsoletus 1 



Stump- tailed skink Tiliqua rugosa 1 



Gerr hosauridae : 



African plated lizard .... ^jonosaurus sp 1 



Madagascar plated lizard . . ^pnosaurus madagascariensis .... 1 



Plated lizard Gerrhosaurus major 1 



Lacertidae: 



European lizard Lacerta strigata trilineata 1 



Sand lizard Lacerta agilis 1 



Teeidae: 



Caiman lizard Dracaena guianensis 1 



Ameiva lizard Ameiva ameiva praesignis 1 




188 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Black tegu Tupinambis nigropunctatus 3 



Spotted whiptail Cnemidophorus gularis 1 



Cordylidae: 



South African spiny lizard . . Gordylus vandami perkoensis .... 2 



African spiny lizard .... Cordylus polyzonus 2 



Varanidae: 



Komodo dragon Varanus komodoensis 1.0 



Dumeril's monitor Varanus dumerili 1 



Malayan monitor Varanus salvator 1 



Helodermatidae : 



Gila monster Heloderma suspectum 1 



Mexican beaded lizard . . . Heloderma h. horridum 2 



Beaded lizard, black phase . Heloderma h. alvernensis 1 



Anguidae: 



European glass lizard, or slow Anguis fragilis 2 



worm. 



Slender glass lizard Ophisaurus attenuatus 2 



European glass lizard .... Ophisaurus apodus 4 



Texas alligator lizard .... Gerrhonotus liocephalus inf emails . . 3 



Serpentes 

 Boidae: 



Common anaconda Eunectes murinus 5 



Trinidad tree boa Epicrates fordii 2 



Cook's tree boa Corallus enydris cooki 1 



Boa constrictor Constrictor c. constrictor 5 



Emperor boa Constrictor c. imperator 1 



Sand boa Eryxjohni 1 



Sand boa Eryxjaculus 1 



Sand boa Eryx conica 1 



Indian python Python molurus 3 



Regal python Python reticulatus 4 



Blood python Python curtis 1 



African python Python sebae 1 



Acrochor didae : 



Elephant trunk snake .... Acrochor dus javanicus 1 



Colubridae: 



New Guinea tree snake . . . Boiga irregularis 1 



Eastern kingsnake Lampropeltis getulus getulus .... 3 



Speckled kingsnake Lampropeltis g. holbrooki 2 



California kingsnake .... Lampropeltis g. calif orniae 3 



Florida kingsnake Lampropeltis g. floridana 3 



Sonoran kingsnake Lampropeltis g. splendida 1 



Scarlet kingsnake Lampropeltis doliata doliata .... 1 



Tropical kingsnake Lampropeltis d. polyzona 1 



Eastern milk snake ..... Lampropeltis d. triangulum .... 2 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 189 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Coastal Plain milk snake . . Lampropeltis d. temporalis 1 



Western milk snake Lampropeltis d. gentilis 1 



Prairie kingsnake Lampropeltis c. calligaster 1 



Mole snake Lampropeltis c. rhombomaculata ... 2 



Texas lined snake Tropidoclonion lineatum texanum ... 1 



Eastern garter snake .... Thamnophis sirtalis sirtalis .... 1 



Eastern black-necked garter Thamnophis cyrtopsis ocellata .... 1 

 snake. 



Pvibbon snake Thamnophis sauritus 1 



Eastern hog-nosed snake . . Heterodon platyrhinos platyrhinos . . . 1 



Common water snake .... Matrix s. sipedon 3 



Broad-banded water snake . . Natrix s. confiuens 1 



Red-bellied water snake . . . Natrix erythrogaster erythrogaster . . 1 



Blotched water snake .... Natrix e. transversa 1 



Diamond-backed water snake . Natrix rhombifera 4 



Brown water snake Natrix taxispilota 4 



Grand Cayman water snake . Tretanorhinus variabilis lewisi ... 4 



Eastern indigo snake .... Drymarchon corals couperi 1 



Texas indigo snake Drymarchon c. erebennus 1 



Black rat snake Elaphe obsoleta obsoleta 6 



Black rat snake, albino . . . Elpahe o. obsoleta *1 



Yellow rat snake Elaphe o. quadrivittata 4 



Texas rat snake Elaphe o. lindheimeri 2 



Corn snake Elaphe guttata guttata 4 



Great Plains rat snake . . . Elaphe g. emoryi 1 



Asiatic striped rat snake . . . Elaphe taeniura 5 



Japanese rat snake Elaphe climacophora 1 



Chinese rat snake Elaphe carinata 2 



Aesculapian snake Elaphe longissima 2 



African house snake .... Boaedon Juliginosus 2 



Banded rat snake Dinodon rufozonatum 4 



European racer Coluber viridijlavus . 



Northern black racer .... Coluber constrictor constrictor .... 



European racer Coluber jugularis caspius 



Pink coachwhip Masticophis fiagellum testaceus . . . 



Northern ringneck snake . . Diadophis punctatus edwardsii .... 



Eastern worm snake .... Carphophis amoenus amoenus .... 



Brown's snake Storeria dekayi 



Great Basin gopher snake . . Pituophis catenifer deserticola .... 



Bullsnake Pituophis c. sayi 



Bullsnake Pituophis sp 



File snake Simocephalus capensis 



Wolf snake Lycodon fiavomaculatum 



Green-headed tree snake . . Leptophis mexicanus 



Glossy snake Arizona elegans 



*On deposit at another zoo or sanctuary. 




190 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



Elapidae: 



Indian cobra Naja naja 1 



Taiwan cobra Naja n. atra 7 



African black cobra .... Naja melanoleaca 1 



King cobra Ophiophagus hannah 2 



Many-banded krait Bungarus multicinctus 2 



Banded krait Bungarus fasciatus 1 



Viperidae: 



Gaboon viper Bitis gabonica 1 



Russell's viper Vipera russelli 1 



Saw-scale viper Echis carinatus 1 



Crotalidae: 



Copperhead Ancistrodon contortrix 2 



Southern copperhead .... Ancistrodon c. contortrix 2 



Northern copperhead .... Ancistrodon c. mokeson 2 



Broad-banded copperhead . . Ancistrodon c. laticinctus 1 



Cottonmouth Ancistrodon p. piscivorus 4 



Western cottonmouth .... Ancistrodon p. leucostoma 1 



Cantil Ancistrodon bilineatus 1 



Pygmy rattlesnake Sistrurus miliarus 1 



Green palm viper Trimeresurus gramineus 1 



Green viper Trimeresurus sp 2 



Mamushi Trimeresurus elegans 1 



Habu Trimeresurus flavoviridis 2 



Western diamondback rattle- Crotalus atrox 6 



snake. 



Timber rattlesnake Crotalus h. horridus 1 



Canebrake rattlesnake . . . Crotalus h. atricaudatus 1 



Mohave diamondback rattle- Crotalus scutulatus 1 



snake. 



AMPHIBIANS 



Gaudata 

 Cryptobranchidae : 



Giant salamander Megalobatrachus japonicus 1 



Amphiumidae: 



Congo eel Amphiuma means 1 



Amby stomatidae : 



Tiger salamander Ambystoma tigrinum 2 



Spotted salamander .... Ambystoma maculatum 1 



Salaman dridae : 



Japanese red-bellied newt . . Diemictylus pyrrhogaster 4 



Red-spotted newt Diemictylus viridescens viridescens . . 11 



Broken-striped newt .... Diemictylus viridescens dorsalis ... 7 



European newt Triturus sp 3 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 191 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 



European newt Triturus sp 4 



Fire salamander Salamandra salamandra 6 



Proteidae: 



Mudpuppy Necturus sp 2 



Salientia 

 Bufonidae: 



American toad Bufo terrestris americanus 1 



Fowler's toad Bufo woodhousei fowleri 1 



Blomberg's toad Bufo blombergi 1 



Giant toad Bufo marinus 8 



Natterjack toad Bufo calamita 1 



Green toad Bufo viridis 1 



Cuban toad Bufo peltocephalus 5 



Crested tropical American Bufo typhonius 2 



toad. 



Colorado River toad .... Bufo alvarius 2 



Western toad Bufo boreas 1 



Pipidae: 



Surinam toad Pipa pipa 4 



African clawed frog Xenopus laevis 3 



Congo pygmy frog Hymenochirus sp 2 



Hylidae: 



Gray tree frog Hyla versicolor 1 



Tree frog Hyla rubra 1 



Canyon tree frog Hyla arenicolor 1 



Green tree frog Hyla cinerea 1 



Barking tree frog Hyla gratiosa 1 



Microhylidae: 



Narrow-mouthed toad . . . Microhyla carolinensis 2 



Ranidae: 



American bull frog Rana catesbeiana 1 



Green frog Rana clamitans melanota 1 



Leopard frog Rana pipiens 25 



FISHES 



Neoceratodontoidei 

 Protopteridae: 



Lungfish Protopterus sp 1 



Enchelycephaloidei 

 Teleostidae: 



Freshwater eel Synbranchus sp. . 




192 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 

 OSTARIOPHYSOIDEI 



Characidae: 



Piranha Serrasalmus natteri 1 



Black tetra Gymnocorymbus ternetzi 1 



Metynnis, or silver dollar . . Metynnis maculatus 1 



Cyprinidae: 



Zebra danio Brachydanio rerio 2 



Tiger barb Barbus partipentazona 1 



White Cloud Mountain fish . Tanichthys albonubes 1 



Goldfish Carassius auratus 31 



Loricariidae: 



South American sucking Hypostomus plecostomus 9 



catfish. 

 Black bullhead Ictalurus melas 1 



Electrophoridae : 

 Electric eel Electrophorus electricus 6 



Cyprinodontoidei 



Poeciliidae: 



Flag-tailed guppy Lebistes reticulatus 10 



Guppy Lebistes reticulatus 15 



Black mollie Mollienesia latipinna 1 



Platy, or moonfish Xiphophorus maculatus 5 



Green swordtail Xiphophorus sp 20 



Red swordtail Xiphophorus sp 40 



Percomorphoidei 



Anabantidae: 



Kissing gourami Helostoma temmincki 1 



Paradise-fish Macropodus operculars 2 



Centrarchidae: 

 Common bluegill Lepomis macrochirus 1 



Cichlidae: 



Peacock cichlid Astronotus ocellatus 1 



Jack Dempsey fish Cichlasoma biocellatum 1 



African mouthbreeder . . . Pelmatochromis guentheri 1 



Angelfish Pterophyllum eimekei 1 



Gobiidae: 

 Bumblebee fish Brachygobius doriae 1 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 193 



ARTHROPODS 

 Decapoda 



Family and common name Scientific name Number 

 Cenobitidae: 



Land hermit crab Coenobita clypeatus 6 



Key West hermit crab . . . Coenobita diogenes 13 



Araneida 

 Aviculariidae: 

 Tarantula Eurypelma sp 1 



Orthoptera 

 Blattidae: 



Tropical giant cockroach . . Blaberus giganteus 35 



MOLLUSKS 



PULMONATA 



Planorbidae: 

 Pond snail Helisoma trivolvis 30 



REPORT OF THE VETERINARIAN 



The posterior paralysis of Nikumba, the male lowland gorilla, has 

 been mentioned in both the 1963 and 1964 reports of the veterinarian. 

 In order to complete the record of his illness, it should be mentioned 

 that mating has been observed on several occasions, and apparently 

 he has made a complete physical and physiological recovery. 



The Komodo dragon, whose infection was discussed in last year's 

 report, has completely recovered. Fecal cultures were made monthly, 

 and in no instance were amoebae or flagellates indicated. 



The operation of the veterinary section was greatly facilitated by 

 the construction of a one-story addition on the rear of the hospital, 

 making it possible to remove animal holding cages from the building 

 and to place them in the new addition. Within the additional space, 

 it was also possible to provide an autopsy room with outside access, 

 thus eliminating the transport of dead animals and birds through the 

 hospital proper. 



Several interesting developments strictly within the field of veterinary 

 medicine occurred during the past year. On July 4, 1964, the male 

 Grevy zebra was observed to have a dangling left hind foot. The 



789-427—06 24 




194 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



stud was immobilized, and X-rays taken in the corral showed a double 

 transverse fracture of the third metacarpal bone. While the animal 

 was under anesthesia a plaster cast with a walking stirrup was applied, 

 permitting relatively normal movement of the zebra. The cast was 

 not disturbed for 12 weeks; following its removal, gradually increasing 

 amounts of weight were placed on the foot. Two months later the 

 animal was moving normally and had made a complete recovery. 



On June 7, 1965, a 400-pound Aldabra tortoise was found lame in 

 the right front leg. X-rays taken in the enclosure revealed the presence 

 of an oblique spiral fracture of the right forelimb, and a cast was 

 applied. To assist in necessary movement, the tortoise was secured 

 on a mover's dolly with ropes across its back. The cast as originally 

 applied was lost the following weekend, and it was decided to immo- 

 bilize the leg by using a part of the dolly as a splint. Relaxation of 

 the right forelimb was much more pronounced, and a cast was applied 

 that completely immobilized the fracture site. This cast will remain 

 approximately 8 weeks, and further X-rays will be taken. The 

 tortoise is separated from its cage mates, moves around effortlessly, 

 and takes full advantage of the wheels on the dolly to support its 

 weight. 



Cultural studies made on buccal and enteric infections in snakes 

 and lizards in the reptile collection revealed a pure culture of Pseudo- 

 monas aruginosa which was chlorotetracycline sensitive. A prophy- 

 lactic program was established in which all snakes and lizards receive 

 chlorotetracycline (soluble aureomycin) in their drinking water for 

 5 days, followed by 9 days of clear water. Since initiation of this pro- 

 gram in mid-January 1965, deaths from necrotic gingivitis and necrotic 

 enteritis in the reptile collection have been reduced to one or two 

 specimens a month. 



An informal agreement was reached with the veterinary pathology 

 section of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Walter Reed 

 Army Medical Center, involving the assignment, on a weekly basis, 

 of a staff member to perform autopsies and to observe the clinically 

 ill animals in the collection. This collaboration has been extremely 

 beneficial both to the AFIP, because of their interest in comparative 

 micropathology, and to the veterinary section, because of the Zoo's 

 interest in having a more definitive statement as to the cause of deaths 

 in the collecton. 



The staff of the veterinary section was increased by one medica 

 technologist, Mrs. Janet Davis, who joined the section on March 1 

 She is a graduate of Oregon State University and has had a broad 

 range of experience in Hawaii and more recently at George Wash- 

 ington Hospital. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 195 



The veterinary section procured the temporary services of three 

 university students through the summer months. They are assisting 

 in the routine operation of the veterinary hospital, as well as in animal 

 care and treatment. 



The veterinary section was fortunate in having the cooperation and 

 assistance of various specialists in the field of clinical investigation and 

 medicine. Among these are Dr. A. G. Carlson of the Mayo Clinic in 

 Rochester, Minn.; Dr. F. R. Lucas, director of the Livestock Sanitary 

 Laboratory in Centerville, Md.; Dr. Anthony Morris of the National 

 Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.; Gen. Joe M. Blumberg and Col. 

 F. M. Garner and their staff of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology. 



The following papers were prepared for publication in the Inter- 

 national Zoo Yearbook, volume 6 (London Zoological Society) : Use of 

 a Walking Cast in a Third Metatarsal Fracture in the £ebra, by Clinton W. 

 Gray, D.V.M.; Amoebiasis in the Komodo Dragon (Varanus komodoensis), 

 by Clinton W. Gray, with Leonard C. Marcus, V.M.D. of the Armed 

 Forces Institute of Pathology, W. C. McCarten, consultant in enteric 

 microbiology, and Thomas Sappington, M.D.; Treatment of Pseudo- 

 monas Infections in the Snake and Lizard Collection at the National Zoological 

 Park, by Clinton W. Gray, Janet Davis, and W. G. McCarten. 



The veterinarian attended a meeting of the American Veterinary 

 Medical Association in Chicago and a seminar on biomedical telemetry 

 at San Francisco. He visited zoos in San Francisco and San Diego 

 and the Penrose Research Laboratory in Philadelphia. 



Two specimens that died during the year may have established 

 longevity records: (1) A Malay porcupine {Acanthion brachyura), col- 

 lected in the vicinity of Pematang Siantar, Sumatra, by the National 

 Geographic-Smithsonian Institution Expedition to the East Indies, 

 was received on September 28, 1937. It died on January 12, 1965, 

 after 27 years 3 months and 15 days in the Zoo. (2) An African 

 lungfish (Protopterus annectens), received on June 10, 1942, as a gift from 

 Dr. Thomas Barbour, director of the Museum of Comparative Zoology, 

 Harvard University, was collected in Uganda in 1937. It fed on meat, 

 liver, hearts, frogs, and tadpoles and had many ailments throughout 

 the years, but through use of mud baths managed to pull through. It 

 was in the mud bath for a month prior to its death on September 25, 

 1964. It had been at the Zoo for 22 years 3 months 15 days and is 

 known to have been in captivity for 5 years previously. 



Following are autopsy statistics for the mortality which occured at the 

 National Zoological Park during the past fiscal year, and a table of 

 comparison with the past 6 years: 




196 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 

 AUTOPSY STATISTICS, 1959-65 



Mortality, fiscal year 1965 



Cause 



Rep- 

 tiles* 



Birds 



Mam- 

 mals 



Total mortality 

 past 7 years 



No autopsy, not enough remains, 



rotten, PMD 



Attrition (within 14 days after 



arrival) 



Systemic disorders 



Infectious diseases 



Injuries, accidents, killed by cage 



mates, not eating 



Euthanasia 



Miscellaneous (parasites, stillborn, 



shock) 



No cause determined 



Total 



150 



5 



51 







12 

 



6 



45 



269 



40 



64 



71 



6 



71 

 2 



1 

 44 



299 



15 



33 

 3 



21 

 12 



10 

 14 



117 



1959. 



1960 

 1961 

 1962 



1963 



1964 



1965. 



472 



532 

 517 



584 



636 

 619 



685 



*Included with reptiles are amphibians, fishes, insects. 



VISITORS 



In August 1961 a planned attendance survey was begun at the Zoo 

 under the direction of Albert Mindlin, statistician of the Management 

 Office, District of Columbia, and was carried out by the police division. 

 The following figures give the total estimated numbers of visitors who 

 remained in the Zoo for at least an hour: 



1962 3,391,977 



1963 3,565,650 



1964 3,943,156 



1965 4,536,256 



Visiting hours at the Zoo were lengthened for the summer months. 

 Beginning July 1, 1964, buildings remained open until 6 p.m. 



Thirteen groups of handicapped children and 24 busloads of patients 

 from St. Elizabeth's Hospital were escorted through the Zoo by various 

 police officers throughout the year. Six busloads of children from 

 Junior Village also visited the Zoo this year. On May 8 a total of 

 7,398 School Safety Patrol children, transported in 205 buses, visited 

 the Park. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 



197 



Seventy members of the Virginia Herpetological Society met in the 

 reptile house on January 9. Films were shown, and snakebite and its 

 treatment were discussed. The Washington Biologists' Field Club held 

 its annual meeting in the reptile house on April 9. The Maharajah 

 of Mysore visited the Zoo on January 9 especially to see the Indian 

 elephant, Ambika, that was given largely through his efforts to the 

 children of America, from the children of India in 1961. 



ESTIMATED NUMBER OF VISITORS FOR FISCAL YEAR 1965 



July (1964) 780, 400 



August 828,475 



September 345, 575 



297,338 



305,075 



58,576 



October . 

 November 

 December 



January (1965). 

 February . . . 

 March . . . . 



April 



May 



. . . 40,065 



. . . 206,200 



. . . 312,990 



. . . 562,640 



. . . 708,485 



June 490,427 



Total 4,536,256 



About 2 p.m. each day the cars parked in the Zoo are counted and 

 listed according to the State or country from which they come. This 

 is, of course, not a census of the cars coming to the Zoo but is valuable 

 in showing the percentage of attendance by States of people in private 

 automobiles. Many District of Columbia, Maryland, and Virginia 

 cars come to the Zoo to bring guests from other States. The tabulation 

 for fiscal year 1965 is as follows: 



Percentage 



Maryland 33. 9 



Virginia 26. 5 



District of Columbia 15.8 



Pennsylvania . 

 New York . . 

 North Carolina 

 New Jersey . . 



Ohio 



West Virginia . 

 Florida . . . 

 Massachusetts . 



4.8 

 2.6 

 2.0 

 1.6 

 1.5 

 1.3 

 1.1 



Percentage 



Connecticut .7 



South Carolina .6 



California .6 



Texas .6 



Michigan .6 



Tennessee .5 



Illinois .5 



Georgia .5 



Delaware .4 



Indiana .3 



Total 97. 2 



The cars that made up the remaining 2.8 percent came from the 

 remainder of the United States as well as foreign countries. 



On days of even small attendance there are cars parked in the Zoo 

 representing foreign countries, territories, and other States. 




198 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



NUMBER OF BUS GROUPS VISITING THE ZOO IN FISCAL YEAR 1965 



Number of Number in 



Locality groups groups 



Alabama 12 485 



Arkansas 1 38 



Connecticut 9 332 



Delaware 31 1,139 



District of Columbia 1,098 21,355 



Florida Ill 3,875 



Georgia 63 2,287 



Illinois 10 318 



Indiana 4 133 



Iowa 5 207 



Kansas 2 80 



Kentucky 27 837 



Maine 8 331 



Maryland 1,684 61,818 



Michigan 9 325 



Minnesota 3 110 



Mississippi 3 110 



Montana 2 79 



New Jersey 42 1,641 



New Mexico 1 35 



New York 285 10,017 



North Carolina 522 9, 882 



North Dakota 1 73 



Ohio 19 617 



Pennsylvania 936 16,090 



South Carolina 46 1, 662 



Tennessee 70 2,726 



Texas 4 157 



Virginia 1,414 53,303 



West Virginia 104 3, 821 



Wisconsin 1 37 



Foreign groups 536 



Total 6,520 194,456 



New construction in connection with the redevelopment program 

 for the National Zoological Park includes provision for parking areas. 

 New parking areas have been completed under this program and during 



the next fiscal year more spaces with greater accessibility to display 

 areas will be available to the public. 



FINANCES 



Funds for the operation of the National Zoological Park are appro- 

 priated annually under the District of Columbia Appropriation Act. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 199 



The operation and maintenance appropriation for fiscal year 1965 

 totaled $1,739,250, which was $141,894 more than for the preceding 

 year. The increase consisted of $24,255 to cover salary increases for 

 general-schedule employees in accordance with Public Law 88-426; 

 $49,995 to cover salary increases for wage-board employees; $31,580 

 for within-grade salary advancements for both general-schedule and 

 wage-board employees; $3,504 for annualization of one position 

 established in fiscal year 1964; $4,300 to establish one position; $6,197 

 for employee's compensation; $7,000 for animal food; $10,000 for the 

 purchase of animals; $1,600 for the replacement of guns; and $3,463 

 for miscellaneous supplies and equipment. 



Of the total appropriation, 85 percent ($1,478,641) was used for 

 salaries and related personnel costs and 15 percent ($259,924) for the 

 maintenance and operation of the Zoo. Included in the latter figure 

 were $88,450 for animal food; $31,140 for fuel and heating; $23,280 for 

 materials for building construction and repairs; $15,500 for electricity; 

 $18,700 for the purchase of animals; $6,900 for telephone, postal, and 

 telegraph services; and $6,735 for veterinarian equipment and supplies. 

 The balance of $69,219 in operational funds was expended for other 

 items, including freight, sundry supplies, uniforms, gasoline, road re- 

 pairs, equipment replacement, and new equipment. 



POLICE DIVISION 



New construction and general facelifting throughout the Park have 

 thrown an extra burden on the police division. Patrolling in areas 

 where trucks and bulldozers are working is important for the safety of 

 the visitors. Shifts have been changed and additional police assigned 

 to these areas. 



For the first time in 35 years, new 38-calibre pistols were bought and 

 issued to every man. Under the watchful eyes of the pistol instructors 

 (Lt. Wolfe, Sgt. Grubbs, Pvts. Porter and McGoldrick) the officers are 

 showing a marked improvement in their scores. Each man has been 

 awarded a badge to be worn on his uniform, denoting his qualification. 



One new scooter was added to the police division's motor vehicles, 

 and others are available from the garage when needed. 



Refresher courses in first aid were again conducted by Sgt. A. L. 

 Canter and Pvt. D. R. Bowman. 



Pvts. H. M. Bell, N. Bowe, V. T. McGoldrick, S. L. Middleton, and 

 F. E. Reilly attended Juvenile School sponsored by the Metropolitan 

 Police Department. This was an 8-week course, and all received 

 certificates at its completion. 




200 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



During the year the police handled 1,141 traffic violations, 31 auto- 

 mobile accidents, 123 juvenile arrests, 83 truancy cases, 37 criminal 

 arrests, 177 miscellaneous complaints, and 149 police investigations. 

 Sixty-nine adults and 278 children were either reprimanded or re- 

 moved from the Park for misbehavior. The first-aid unit treated 716 

 cases, most of them minor. 



Through the efforts of Lt. J. R. Wolfe, blood procurement officer, 

 the American Red Cross Blood Bank received 41 pints of blood from 

 Zoo employees during the year, making a total of 829 pints reserved 

 for them in the Blood Bank. Twenty-three pairs of eyeglasses and 

 sunglasses, found and unclaimed, were donated to the D.C. Chapter of 

 the Society for the Prevention of Blindness. Fifteen bags of clothing 

 and miscellaneous articles, found and unclaimed, were turned over to 

 the Goodwill Industries. 



During the year a total of 10,837 visitors stopped at the police station 

 requesting information or assistance. 



SAFETY SUBCOMMITTEE 



The National Zoological Park Safety Subcommittee held monthly 

 meetings to suggest and discuss recommendations to the director for 

 safety improvements. 



An emergency alarm system was installed in the reptile house to be 

 used in the event of snakebite. Under the direction of the safety officer, 

 this system is under constant surveillance to assure proper functioning, 

 and test drills are held periodically. 



Arrangements were made with the General Services Administration 

 to have employees receive training in firefighting and fire control. 

 GSA fire inspectors made the annual fire inspection of the Zoo, along 

 with members of the safety subcommittee, and their cooperation was 

 very much appreciated. 



Members of the subcommittee periodically inspected all buildings, 

 grounds, and equipment and made a careful examination of the newly 

 renovated birdhouse area prior to its opening to the public; hazards 

 were reported and corrective action was recommended. 



Routine inspection of roads, walkways, steps, and public areas has 

 continued as a safeguard to employees and visitors. 



MAINTENANCE, CONSTRUCTION, GROUNDS 



The mechanical division was occupied with the routine task of 

 maintaining the buildings and facilities of the National Zoological 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 201 



Park. Interspersed with routine were such unusual jobs as building a 

 hydroponics room for growing grass and enlarging the room where 

 worms and insects are raised for animal food. 



An addition was made to the building serving as veterinary hospital. 

 Two old storerooms in the administration building were cleared out 

 and completely remodeled to serve as offices for the director. The 

 entire mechanical force joined in readying the remodeled birdhouse 

 for its opening. 



New construction necessitated preparing quarters for many of the 

 animals. A barn and paddock at the Garvin Tankersley farm in 

 Boyds, Md., were made suitable for the zebras quartered there while 

 their new Zoo enclosures were being built. 



Painting is a never-ending task. This year the interiors of the lion, 

 monkey, reptile, and small-mammal houses were painted. 



The mechanical force made 190 new park benches and set them up 

 throughout the Park for the comfort and convenience of visitors. The 

 electrician installed a much-needed fluorescent lighting system in the 

 puma house. 



Work of the grounds division included the planting of 93 trees, 400 

 evergreens, 700 azaleas, 1,000 bulbs, and 3,500 annuals. 



Trees were planted along the creek banks near the pistol range, the 

 restaurant patio, behind the small mammal building, and along the 

 sidewalk at the crosswalk. Azaleas were planted between the restaurant 

 and the police station, around the elephant house guard rails, elephant 

 house hill, birdhouse, and at the crossroads. Various bulbs and annuals 

 were used in the flowerbeds, new and old, throughout the Park, extend- 

 ing color in the beds from early spring well into winter. Lightning 

 protection on two large trees near the administration building was 

 installed. 



The grounds department removed dead wood from 100 trees over 

 walks, roads, and public areas: felled 35 trees that were dead or in bad 

 condition or considered noxious to animals; filled cavities and traced 

 wounds on badly damaged trees; removed stumps from lawns; cut 

 numerous perches for bird and animal cages, and cut foliage to be used 

 as food for animals. 



Major projects included assisting in the preparation of the birdhouse 

 for opening, setting out 2,000 new plants, installing large perches, 

 scouting the wooded areas for old logs and stumps and placing them 

 around the inside cages. 



Gifts of plants were received from the District Waterworks, Botanical 

 Gardens, National Bureau of Standards, Glendale Nursery, Walter 

 Reed Hospital, Naval Hospital, and the management of the annual 

 Flower and Garden Show. 




202 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



COOPERATION 



At all times special efforts are made to maintain friendly contacts 

 with other Federal and State agencies, private concerns and individuals, 

 and scientific workers for mutual assistance. As a result, the Zoo 

 receives much help and advice and many valuable animals, and in turn 

 it furnishes information and, whenever possible, animals it does not 

 need. 



Special acknowledgment is due William Taback and John Pulaski, 

 in the office of the Dispatch Agent in New York City, and Stephen E. 

 Lato, Dispatch Agent in San Francisco, who are frequently called upon 

 to clear shipments of animals coming from abroad, often at times of 

 personal inconvenience. 



When it is necessary to quarantine animals coming into this country, 

 they are taken to the U.S. Department of Agriculture's station in 

 Clifton, N.J. During the past year, Dr. H. A. Waters and Andy 

 Goodel, two of the officials stationed there, were most cooperative in 

 keeping the National Zoological Park informed as to the well-being of 

 animals and birds being held there for quarantine. 



Animals that died in the Zoo are offered to the U.S National Museum. 

 If the Museum does not need them as study specimens or as exhibits, 

 they are sent on request to research workers in other institutions. 

 Specialists at the Museum are always willing to be of help in identifying 

 rare specimens acquired at the Zoo. 



On May 7, 1965, under the auspices of the U.S. Forest Service, 

 Smokey Bear, living symbol of forest fire prevention, received a certifi- 

 cate and gold-medal award. These awards were presented by Lassie, 

 star collie of the Lassie television series. 



Through the generosity of Stuart T. Saunders, chairman of the 

 board, Pennsylvania Railroad Co., and John K. Murphy, public 

 relations director, the Zoo received on June 23, 1965, a large carved 

 granite eagle, one of 22 which graced the Pennsylvania Railroad 

 Station in New York City from 1910 to 1965. At the demolition of 

 the building, it was given to the National Zoo. Designed by the ar- 

 chitectural firm of McKim, Mead & White, it weighs 5,700 pounds 

 and stands 5 feet 4 inches high. It is now facing the plaza in front of 

 the birdhouse. 



The National Zoological Park cooperated with the National Capital 

 Parks and lent small animals to Park naturalists and to the Nature 

 Center in Rock Creek Park for demonstration. 



The U.S. Army, Cameron Station, Va., again lent the grounds 

 department a stump chipper, to be used in clearing unsightly stumps 

 from Zoo lawns. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 203 



On April 24, Sgt. Canter of the police force took six boxes of Crotalidae 

 antivenin to Children's Hospital for a patient who had been bitten 

 by a snake. These boxes were replaced by Children's Hospital the 

 next day. 



Vultures were made available to Betsy Garrett Bang, School of 

 Hygiene and Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, for her studies. 

 Results of her research were published as The Nasal Organs of the 

 Black and Turkey Vultures; a Comparative Study of the Cathartid Species 

 in the Journal of Morphology, vol. 115, No. 2, September 1964. 



FRIENDS OF THE NATIONAL ZOO 



The Friends of the National Zoo held their annual meeting on 

 October 7 in the Zoo cafeteria. This was followed by an inspection 

 tour of the birdhouse area. On the evening of February 1 1 many of 

 the Friends attended the formal opening of the remodeled birdhouse. 



Friends of the National Zoo continued their publication of a quarterly 

 newsletter entitled Spots and Stripes. Members of the Zoo staff collab- 

 orate in the preparation of the material, but the newsletter is financed 

 and distributed by the Friends. They have also continued to work 

 on plans for an educational program to be aimed at various levels, 

 with the purpose of making the Zoo more meaningful to the schools. 



INFORMATION AND EDUCATION 



The major activity of the information and education section was 

 the continuation of signing, relabeling, and graphic-arts services and 

 support. During the year a total of 481 animal identification labels 

 were completed, and an additional 115 are in production. Also pro- 

 duced were 218 supporting informational signs (safety signs, building 

 information signs, directional maps, construction signs, etc.) and 188 

 other visual information projects such as maps, charts, graphs, draw- 

 ings, and publication layouts. Two scale models were also produced 

 in conjunction with the renovation plans for the Zoo. 



Additional activities during the year included dissemination of 

 animal information by telephone and correspondence; library and 

 photograph file maintenance; and 23 special guided tours for groups 

 of handicapped children, visiting schools and colleges, visiting personnel 

 from other zoos, and foreign guests and dignitaries. 



The zoologist participated in two television programs for the edu- 

 cational channel WETA. One was filmed in the studio using three 




204 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



live animals, and the other was filmed directly at the Zoo, the first 

 show to be taped by WETA's mobile unit. 



The zoologist also taped a 15-minute radio program on the Zoo for 

 the Armed Forces Radio, Military District of Washington Information 

 Office. 



A paper was prepared for the International Zoo Yearbook, vol. 6, 

 (London Zoological Society) on Behaviour and Development of a Hand- 

 Reared Two-Toed Sloth (Cholocpus didactylus), by Marion P. McCrane, 

 zoologist. 



PERSONNEL 



Donald R. Dietlein, formerly medical entomologist with the U.S. 

 Navy, was appointed special assistant to the director in September. 

 Kerry Muller, formerly senior keeper in the birdhouse at the San Diego 

 Zoo, became manager of the bird division here in May; and Robert 

 H. Artis was appointed as personnel management specialist in May. 



J. Lear Grimmer, associate director of the Zoo since 1957, resigned 

 on April 15, 1965, to engage in private research. Michael A. Brown, 

 senior animal keeper, retired on December 19 after 45 years of service; 

 Ralph B. Norris, head animal keeper, retired on the same date after 34 

 years at the Zoo. 



In fiscal year 1965 the Zoo had 212 authorized positions, as follows: 

 Office of the Director, 12 (an increase of 1 special assistant to the di- 

 rector by reallocation from the operations and maintenance depart- 

 ment); operations and maintenance department, which includes the 

 mechanical division, police division, grounds division, and services 

 division, 122 (an increase of 1 authorized laborer and a reallocation of 1 

 labor position to the office of the director); animal department, 76 

 (a reallocation of 1 position to the scientific research department); 

 scientific research department, 2 (an increase of 1 visual aid specialist 

 by reallocation of an animal keeper position). 



The Smithsonian Institution named three persons as honorary col- 

 laborators in recognition of their contributions to the National Zoologi- 

 cal Park. These were Jean Delacour, world-renowned ornithologist, 

 for his help and advice in stocking the new birdhouse, suggesting which 

 species of birds should be exhibited, and giving valuable counsel in 

 regard to suitable plants; J. Lear Grimmer, former associate director of 

 the National Zoological Park, in recognition of his scientific and manage- 

 ment contributions; and Mrs. Constance P. Warner, who has been 

 associated with the Zoo for the past 8 years, working with the collection 

 as an animal photographer. Mrs. Warner has generously allowed the 

 Zoo to use freely any of her beautiful transparencies for labels and 

 publications. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 205 



The director attended the annual meeting of the American Associa- 

 tion of Zoological Parks and Aquariums in Houston, Tex.; the midyear 

 Zoo Directors Conference in Colorado Springs, Colo.; and the Western 

 Regional Zoo Conference in Calgary, Alberta. The director was 

 present at the opening of the new aquatic birdhouse in the New York 

 Zoological Park on September 24 and at the formal dedication cere- 

 monies of the new rare mammal house in the Philadelphia Zoological 

 Gardens on May 1 . On May 20 the director attended a conference, 

 held at the New York Zoo, to discuss problems resulting from large- 

 scale importations of primates for medical research. Lectures during 

 the year included groups at the Cosmos Club and the University Club 

 in Washington, D.C., the Metropolitan Chapter of the American 

 Institute of Architects, and a meeting of the Dakota Zoological Society 

 in Bismarck, N. Dak. 



Donald R. Dietlein, special assistant to the director, made official 

 visits to Philadelphia, New York, St. Louis, and Chicago for the pur- 

 pose of studying zoo problems and maintenance. 



Charles Thomas, senior keeper, left on June 1 1 for Liberia, escorting 

 a shipment of animals for President Tubman's farm at Totota. He 

 is expected to return about the end of July bringing with him some 

 African animals. 



A biweekly newsletter, Tiger Talk, was started on November 24. 

 This is solely for distribution to Zoo employees and serves to let each 

 department know what other sections are doing. 



REORGANIZATION 



To meet more adequately the 1890 Congressional mandate to the 

 Zoo for "the advancement of science and the education ... of the 

 public" a reorganization of the Zoo's personnel and functions was 

 effected during the year. There was created a department of scien- 

 tific research to be headed by a resident scientist (reallocated associate 

 director position) who will develop and direct the program within 

 the Zoo. Also, by reallocation from the animal department, a staff 

 scientist position was created and a secretary was reallocated from 

 the operational services program. The scientific research department 

 will develop into one of the Zoo's major functions. 



The engineer and draftsman positions were moved from the opera- 

 tions and maintenance department to a staff function of the director's 

 office. The complexity of the construction program necessitated 

 constant technical supervision. 



The information and education program was transferred from the 

 former scientific research division to a staff position in the office of the 




206 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



director. The staff has been increased by reallocating a position from 

 the operational services program and a position from the protective 

 services to create a docent and a visual information specialist. In 

 addition to the signs and labels, the responsibilities of public relations, 

 development of publications, and maintenance of libraries have been 

 assigned to information and education. 



A position of divisional animal manager for each of the four divisions 

 in the animal department has been created. As time and staffing 

 permit, these positions will be filled by zoologically educated and 

 experienced animal managers. 



It is felt that this reorganization will increase the potential for a 

 higher level of animal care and increased scientific investigations. 



CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS 



In fiscal year 1965 the Smithsonian Institution Appropriation Act 

 contained an item of $1,525,000 for the capital improvement program 

 at the National Zoological Park. A portion of this is being used for 

 the planning of the hospital and research complex and the service 

 buildings — mechanical shop, automotive garage, property supply 

 building, and greenhouse. The architect was selected for the planning 

 of buildings in Phase IV of the new Zoo construction. At the sug- 

 gestion of the Fine Arts Commission a landscape architect was engaged 

 to assist in coordinating the entire plan and to make whatever adjust- 

 ments in the master plan are necessary. Planning of the multiclimate 

 house has been delayed until its siting is approved. The construction 

 money was used for the hardy and delicate hoofed-stock areas and for 

 the sewerage system. 



On July 21 work was started on the deer area, which consists of 8 

 paddocks, 3 single shelters, and 2 double shelters on the previously 

 undeveloped hill between the Connecticut Avenue entrance and the 

 birdhouse. The anticipated completion date is early fall 1965. 



On the same date, construction was started on parking lots A and B, 

 located beside the new perimeter road between the elephant house and 

 the Connecticut Aveune gate. This work was finished on May 30. 

 These lots are designed for automobiles only, and accommodate 258 cars. 



At the same time, construction work began on a fenced-in property 

 yard and access road directly west of the Holt mansion. This con- 

 struction eliminated the old carriage barn. It is anticipated that 

 completion will be in the early fall of 1965. 



In October the relief interceptor sewer mentioned in last year's 

 annual report was completed. Stone riprap was placed on the west 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 207 



bank of Rock Creek, which had been straightened, and willow and 

 mulberry trees were planted. In a few years the austere vista will be a 

 refreshing green and covered with foliage. 



On December 4 final inspection of the remodeled birdhouse was made 

 and the building accepted from the contractor. The next 2 months 

 were spent in feverish activity of planting, decorating the cages, assem- 

 bling the birds, and developing new routines of management. On the 

 evening of February 11, there was an invitational black-tie opening, 

 sponsored by the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. Minibuses 

 were hired to carry the guests from the elephant house parking lot to the 

 birdhouse. Fort Belvoir engineers furnished lights to illuminate the 

 uncompleted great flight cage, and the Marine Corps furnished a jazz 

 ensemble to brighten the party. The guests had a wonderful time and 

 seemed to derive pleasure from being served canapes in the birds' 

 kitchen. Two days later there was an invitational opening for the 

 Friends of the National Zoo and employees of the Smithsonian Institu- 

 tion. On February 14 the birdhouse was opened to the general public 

 and has been a tremendous success ever since. A paper on The Remod- 

 eled Bird House and New Great Flight Cage at the National Zoological Park 

 by Theodore H. Reed, D.V.M., will appear in volume 6 of the Inter- 

 national Zoo Yearbook, published by the London Zoological Society. 



On April 22 the construction of the hardy and delicate hoofed-stock 

 areas was begun. 



On May 10 work started on a new transformer station for the Zoo 

 at the Hawthorne Street gate back of the birdhouse, which will step 

 down 13.2 kv. to 4.16 kv. for distribution throughout the whole Park. 

 Installation of a new gas-fired boiler for the remodeled birdhouse 

 was also started. 



In the middle of June the great flight cage was given final inspection 

 and accepted. Again there is a period of feverish activity in getting 

 the plants and other last-minute adjustments ready for a mid-July 

 opening. The great flight cage received a citation for excellence in 

 design from the American Iron and Steel Institute. 



On June 21 contractors began work on parking lot F, located behind 

 the restaurant between Beach Drive and Rock Creek. When com- 

 pleted, this parking lot will accommodate 24 buses and 270 automobiles. 



National Capital Parks, Department of the Interior, has lined the 

 tunnel under administration hill (mentioned in last year's report) 

 and installed electric facilities, and is constructing the portals and a 

 bridge across Rock Creek at the lower end. 



During the year, the designs for the Zoo's internal sewerage system 

 were completed and construction will start early next fiscal year. 





Astrophysical Observatory 



789-427—66 25 





Astrophysical Observatory 



Fred L. Whipple, Director 



The research achievements of the Observatory derive significantly 

 from its ability to obtain data from its field installations and laborato- 

 ries and to combine these with theoretical investigations.* To illustrate 

 and emphasize this point, the results summarized in subsequent para- 

 graphs are traced back to their origins in observational data. During 

 the past year, the diversity of the data and the number of sources have 

 been increased. That diversity is typified by the variety of observa- 

 tions that now come from the Baker-Nunn cameras at the Observa- 

 tory's field station. 1 In recognition of this fact, their name has been 

 changed from Satellite Tracking Stations to Astrophysical Observing 

 Stations. 



RESEARCH BASED ON DATA FROM 

 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVING STATIONS 



Gathering observational data on artificial satellites is still the major 

 activity of the stations. During this past year, 52,528 observations of 

 55 different satellites were made. Successful cooperation with the Air 

 Force Baker-Nunn camera stations resulted in a series of observations 

 linking the two networks. In addition, the Observatory has conducted 

 a joint project with the Royal Radar Establishment, Malvern, England, 

 using their 24-inch f/1 cameras to track bright passive satellites for 

 geodetic objectives. 1 



An important new development under the direction of Carlton G. 

 Lehr has been the experimental use of a laser beam to track satellites, 

 a technique that permits the measurement of the range of the orbiting 

 object from the observing site. 1 



Satellite tracking data continue to yield significant advances in our 

 knowledge of the upper atmosphere. From an analysis of satellite drag 



* Unless otherwise noted, research is supported from Federal funds appropriated 

 to the Smithsonian Institution. The Observatory, by paying scientists' salaries, 

 shares in the support of all research. Support from outside sources is detailed in 

 footnotes 1-25 on this and the following pages. 



1 Supported by grant NsG 87/60 from the National Aeronautics and Space 

 Administration. 



211 




212 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



data gathered between sunspot maximum (1958) and minimum (1964), 

 Dr. Luigi G. Jacchia has derived new atmospheric models based on 

 diffusion equilibrium. With the collaboration of Dr. Max Roemer 

 and Jack Slowey, he has computed densities of the neutral atmosphere 

 starting from a fixed set of boundary conditions at 120 km. and follow- 

 ing empirical temperature profiles defined by exponential functions 

 of height. These models have been adopted by the U.S. Committee 

 on the Extension of the Standard Atmosphere for inclusion in the U.S. 

 Supplemental Atmospheres, together with the appended formulas 

 which give the variations of temperature with solar, geomagnetic, 

 and geographic parameters. 



A significant new result is the discovery that a seasonal effect exists 

 at middle and high latitudes at all heights up to at least 600 km. An 

 analysis of observations of 14 satellites, including two 12-foot balloon 

 satellites (1963 53A and 1964 76A) launched specifically for this 

 research, has revealed that at any given height above 200 km., the 

 atmosphere has a maximum density in winter and a minimum in 

 summer. 



Dr. Jacchia and Mr. Slowey have also investigated the relation 

 between exospheric temperature and geomagnetic indexes and con- 

 cluded that the former varies with the solar plasma velocities in a 

 nearly linear fashion. 



Dr. Manfred Friedman has developed a set of equations to describe 

 the structure of the upper atmosphere. The analysis based on these 

 equations will include effects of thermal conductivity, radiative trans- 

 fer, and diffusion of the different constituents. 



A new estimate has been made by Dr. Franco Verniani of the total 

 mass of the earth's atmosphere. The result is (5.136±0.007)X10 21 

 grams. 



Data from satellite tracking have also been used in the study of the 

 geopotential. From precisely reduced observations of nine satellites 

 with inclinations between 28 and 95 degrees, Dr. Yoshihide Kozai has 

 derived new values for the coefficients of the zonal harmonics of the 

 earth's gravitational field through J H . Treating these zonal har- 

 monics as known quantities, Imre Izsak used more than 26,000 obser- 

 vations of 11 satellites with inclinations between 33 and 96 degrees to 

 compute a new set of tesseral harmonics through the sixth degree. 

 Since independent determinations give reasonable agreement on the 

 total contribution of the nonzonal terms to the geopotential, the main 

 features of the geoid seem to be well established. 



Basing his work on the results of Dr. Kozai and Mr. Izsak, E. M. 

 Gaposchkin has improved the treatment of perturbations in the Ob- 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 213 



servatory's computer program for differential orbit improvement and 

 is now extending the program for determining the tesseral harmonics. 



The shapes for the surfaces of the constant potential and constant 

 gravitation are being studied by Dr. Walter Kohnlein. 



Studies of the geophysical significance of satellite gravity results 

 continue. From an analysis of zonal harmonics, Dr. Chi-Yuen Wang 

 has suggested that the load of the last continental ice sheets, which per- 

 sisted some 50,000 years near the end of the Pleistocene, may have de- 

 formed the earth, flattening it near the poles and causing a bulge near 

 the equator. Since the ice sheets retreated only some 11,000 to 15,000 

 years ago, there has been too little time for a complete isostatic recov- 

 ery of the earth, and the residual of this deformation therefore remains 

 in the earth's ellipticity. Using different approaches, Dr. William 

 Strange and Dr. Wang have been investigating the possible relations 

 between heat-flow and the gravity results. 



The Baker-Nunn camera system of the Observatory is a principal 

 source of data for the NASA Geodetic Program begun this year, and 

 studies in these fields by Observatory scientists have been and will con- 

 tinue to be an important part of the program. 2 



The rate of accumulation, reduction, and analysis of data from simul- 

 taneous photography of satellites by two or more Baker-Nunn cameras 

 was increased considerably during the year. A cooperative program 

 was initiated with the Air Force to use Baker-Nunn cameras at Oslo, 

 Norway; Cold Lake, Canada; and Johnston Island, Pacific Ocean. 1 

 These stations were used to provide data to strengthen the solutions 

 for the coordinates of the SAO Baker-Nunn stations by providing a 

 triangular network of stations in North America and Europe and by 

 decreasing the distance between intervisible stations in the Pacific 

 Ocean. From this network of 1 5 stations, we now have data of inter- 

 visibilities that encompass the globe, providing another mathematical 

 condition that enhances the precision of the resultant geodetic infor- 

 mation. About 800 intervisible arcs were precisely reduced during the 

 year, compared to a total of 200 in the previous 3 years. Dr. George 

 Veis, assisted by Leendert Aardoom and Antanas Girnius, analyzed 

 these data to determine more precise station coordinates. 



A companion program employed in the Observatory's geodetic 

 studies determines not only the tesseral harmonic coefficients for the 

 geopotential but also improves station coordinates from an analysis of 

 data of orbit dynamics. Mr. Izsak determined a set of more accurate 

 station coordinates at the same time as he solved for the tesseral har- 

 monic coefficients. 



3 Supported by contract NSR 09-015-018 with the National Aeronautics and 

 Space Administration. 




214 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



A procedure was developed by Dr. Kohnlein to combine the results 

 of the intervisible (geometric) method and those of theorbital (dynamic) 

 method to determine still more accurate station coordinates and the 

 tesseral harmonics through the fourth order. It was gratifying to 

 learn that the geometric and dynamic methods of determining station 

 coordinates were in good agreement. Until this comparison, it was 

 not known whether there might be a difference in the two results due 

 to some unrecognized factor. 



The Astrophysical Observing Stations also gather data for the study 

 of comets. Nine of the Baker-Nunn cameras have been equipped with 

 a plastic defocusing device; measurements of the image density of 

 photographs made through these optics reveal the total brightness of 

 a comet. A total of 303 sequences of photometric observations of 

 four comets, particularly of Ikeya and Everhart, have thus far been 

 obtained. 3 



Dr. Richard B. Southworth analyzes these films for correlations 

 with solar phenomena and for indications of the physical behavior 

 of comets. As a necessary part of this work, Dr. Southworth is con- 

 ducting an initial study to solve the problem of transferring observed 

 stellar magnitudes to the Baker-Nunn color system. For the deter- 

 mination of the spectral sensitivity of the Baker-Nunn optics, a catalog 

 of published spectrophotometric data on standard stars has been 

 compiled, and microdensitometer measurements have been made on 

 films taken with the camera. 



To answer the question whether streams of solar particles reaching a 

 comet play a significant role in its activity, Daniel Malaise, at 1' Uni- 

 versity de Liege, is investigating the apparent motion of bright streamers 

 in comet tails, using Baker-Nunn photographs. 4 He is also studying 

 the pseudoperiodic variation of the apparent angle between the comet 

 tail and the radial direction from the sun. More than 200 photographic 

 sequences of tail motion are being reduced and analyzed. 



For another line of investigation, the Astrophysical Observing Sta- 

 tions obtain photographs of flare stars, which are characterized by 

 sudden, nonperiodic increases in brightness. On a predetermined 

 schedule, the stations repeatedly photograph a known flare star that 

 is simultaneously being observed by one of the cooperating radio 

 telescopes. Presently we cooperate in this program with the 250' 

 Jodrell Bank telescope at Manchester, England, the 210' telescope 

 at Parker, N.S.W, Australia, and the 1000' Cornell instrument at 

 Arecibo, Puerto Rico. The resultant records permit a study of the 



3 Supported by grant GP 2999 from the National Science Foundation. 

 * Sponsored by fellowships from Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique, 

 Belgium, the European Preparatory Commission for Space Research, and NASA. 




ASTROPHYSIGAL OBSERVATORY 215 



relationship between optical and radio emissions. During this year, 

 approximately 270 hours of optical observations have been logged, 

 the data from which are analyzed by Leonard Solomon. The India 

 cooperating agency, the Uttar Pradesh Observatory, has joined the 

 program for observing flare stars and is using a photoelectric 

 photometer in its research. 



Astrophysical Observing Stations have in past years made photo- 

 metric observations to determine the earth's albedo. 6 In a continuing 

 program, Dr. Fred A. Franklin is testing improved techniques and 

 instrumentation to measure the earthshine on the dark portion of 

 the moon's surface before first quarter and after last quarter. Sun- 

 light reflected from the earth faintly illuminates this part of the moon 

 and can therefore indicate how reflective the earth is. 



METEORS 



Ground-based photographic and radar instruments provide data 

 on the meteor process as a fragment of matter plunges into the earth's 

 atmosphere from space. 6 



The automatic camera stations that make up the Prairie Network 

 are providing data on bright meteors that will enable scientists to 

 determine their orbits. In addition, there is the hope that some of 

 the bodies photographed by the network will survive their journey 

 and will be recovered on the earth's surface. Such freshly fallen 

 meteorites can provide valuable data on the history of the objects 

 in space. Dr. Richard E. McCrosky continues to supervise operations 

 and to analyze photographs taken by the network's cameras. 



In the 11 months from May 1964 to April 1965, the period for which 

 complete results are available, the network photographed 34 multiple- 

 station meteors. Of these observations, 20 to 22 were of adequate 

 quality for reduction to orbits. Because meteorite falls might have 

 occurred, four of these were on a high priority basis. Subsequent 

 analysis showed that a substantial fall certainly resulted from one of 

 these events but not from the other three. For the one fall, Observa- 

 tory personnel thoroughly searched a 1 -square-mile section of Marshall 

 County, Kans., but failed to find the object. However, the local popu- 

 lace has been alerted to the fall and there still remains the possibility 

 that a recovery may be made in a cultivated area. 



Personnel of the Astrophysical Observing Stations have also been 

 requested to watch for meteoritic material that might be of interest to 



8 Supported in part by grant Y/8. 11/236 from the National Science Foundation. 

 6 Supported by grant NsG 291-62 from the National Aeronautics and Space 

 Administration. 




216 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Observatory scientists. Robert Citron at the South Africa station has 

 recovered meteoritic specimens and added to our knowledge of the 

 Gibeon meteorite fall. 



In the study of ionized meteor trails, electronic techniques play an 

 important role. In Havana, 111., a radar installation jointly operated 

 with the Harvard College Observatory, and under the direction of Dr. 

 Gerald S. Hawkins and Dr. Southworth, has yielded observations of 

 some 10,000 meteor trails. 7 These have been electronically measured 

 and reduced. Since they are of both sporadic and stream meteors, 

 they will provide a substantial body of data for research into the astrono- 

 my and physics of meteor particles. 8 Dr. Southworth has been 

 planning and supervising the improvement of the system so that it will 

 be able to achieve greater accuracy of observations and to observe more 

 and fainter meteors. 



Dr. Verniani and Dr. Hawkins have revised the ionization proba- 

 bilities involved in the meteor process, thus permitting new estimates 

 of the mass and density for a large sample of faint radio meteors. The 

 mean density from this determination is 1 gm. cm. -3 , and the mass 

 distribution corresponds to that of the brighter photographic meteors 

 observed with Super-Schmidt cameras. 



In cooperation with Dr. William G. Elford of the University of 

 Adelaide, Australia, Dr. Hawkins has found the flux of meteors more 

 massive than 10~ 6 gm. to be 40 km. -2 hr." 1 . 



Together with Dr. Hawkins and Dr. Verniani, Dr. Southworth has 

 computed the ablation coefficient, which represents the rate of loss of 

 mass by a meteor moving through the atmosphere. With Dr. Elford 

 and Dr. Hawkins, he has determined the distribution of the radiants of 

 sporadic meteors. 



To gather data on high-altitude wind velocities and directions, Dr. 

 Mario D. Grossi has designed the necessary modifications of the Havana 

 equipment. 9 



The extensive analysis of the atmospheric trajectories of 413 pre- 

 cision-reduced Super-Schmidt meteors, which Dr. Jacchia conducted 

 with the collaboration of Dr. Verniani and Robert E. Briggs, has been 

 completed and is presented in Special Report No. 175. The analysis 

 confirms the importance of fragmentation in the meteor phenomenon 

 and the individual physical characteristics of meteors in different 

 showers, on which Dr. Jacchia reported in past years. From the fact 



7 Supported by contract NASr-158 between the National Aeronautics and Space 

 Administration and Harvard University. 



8 Supported in part by contract NAS 9-4873 with the NASA Manned Space 

 Center. 



9 Supported by contract AF 19(628)-3248 with the U.S. Air Force. 






Tlfr 



Radar observing sites (trough-type antenna as shown) for measuring the 

 speed, trajectory, and flux of micrometeoroids entering the earth's atmosphere 

 are maintained in several locations by the Smithsonian Astrophysical and 

 Harvard College Observatories. Information concerning these particles 

 is of vital interest to spacecraft designers preparing for the hazards of future 

 space flights. 




Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory headquarters, Cambridge, 

 Massachusetts. 



The Baker-Nunn camera, designed to the specifications of Smithsonian Astro- 

 physical Observatory scientists, is a special satellite-tracking camera first 

 put into operation in 1957 in time to photograph Sputnik I less than two 

 weeks after launch. Since then, SAO's Baker-Nunn's have taken more than 

 150,000 photographs of objects in space. 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 217 



that some meteors suddenly break up completely at a point for which 

 pv 3 is a constant (p— atmospheric density, v= meteor velocity) we 

 infer that heat transfer rather than dynamic pressure is the trigger 

 mechanism in the breakup; this leads to the picture of a meteor body 

 so porous that air molecules can penetrate to its core. Larger meteors 

 do not break up so suddenly and completely, apparently because of 

 the shielding effect of the outer layers of the meteor body. 



To complement the study of natural meteors, a radar system similar 

 to that in Havana has been built and put into operation south of 

 Wallops Island, Va., to detect the reentry of artificial meteors. 10 The 

 first records were obtained from this installation when a nickel-iron 

 slug and an iron sphere were fired into the atmosphere with a velocity 

 of approximately 10 km. sec. -1 This simulation is of great importance 

 in testing the ionization and luminosity hypotheses that have been 

 used in estimates of meteor masses. This work is closely correlated 

 with that of a network of three cameras for photographing the arti- 

 ficial meteors. Drs. Hawkins, Southworth, and McCrosky direct the 

 scientific aspects of this investigation. NASA furnishes and fires the 

 artificial meteors and the rockets. The Smithsonian field operations 

 of both systems are under the management of Cliff Marsh. 



LABORATORY ASTROPHYSICS 



Laboratory investigations of the Observatory involve meteoritics, 

 the atmosphere, comets, and exobiology. 



The sources of data for the Observatory's program in meteoritics 

 are collections of meteorites, meteoritic fragments, and dust particles, 

 and their analysis in the laboratory. 



Collaborating with Chester C. Langway, Jr., of the Army Cold Re- 

 gions Research Laboratory, Dr. Edward L. Fireman is collecting dust 

 samples from melted snow deep within the Greenland ice sheet. Several 

 years ago unwanted heat from a power installation in Greenland was 

 dissipated by a radiator in the ice. The heat melted out a cavern 

 about 110 feet in radius that is now slowly refreezing. Dr. Fireman 

 and Mr. Langway have installed a pump and filters which retrieve 

 from the water the dust that was imbedded in the snow and ice before 

 they were melted. This collection technique is an improvement over 

 that employed in previous years when a filter was used in the camp 

 water supply, which was also derived from melted glacial ice. Using 

 previous collections, an analysis of particles collected from the melting 



10 Supported by grant NsG 536 from the National Aeronautics and Space Ad- 

 ministration. 




218 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



of millions of liters of ice and snow shows the presence of cobalt-60 but 

 not of aluminum-26 or argon-39 radioactivities in the dust. On the 

 basis of the decay characteristics of cobalt-60, Dr. Fireman and his 

 collaborators tentatively ascribe this activity to iron-60 produced by 

 cosmic rays. James C. DeFelice has developed a high-pressure geiger 

 counter that is particularly useful in this work. 



Dr. Fireman wrote the 3-year summary article on meteorites for 

 the commission on meteors and meteorites of the International Astro- 

 nomical Union for 1965. 



Dr. David Tilles has made mass spectrometric studies of rare gases 

 extracted from Pacific sea sediments and from the Greenland materials 

 collected by Dr. Fireman and Mr. Langway. 11 From his analysis he 

 has confirmed the anomalous argon isotope ratios (an Ar^/Ar 36 ratio 

 below 200 compared with the atmospheric ratio of 295) of argon re- 

 leased at high temperatures from a magnetic fraction of Pacific sediment 

 previously reported by Dr. Craig M. Merrihue. He has also found 

 similar argon anomalies in a separated high-density fraction of Green- 

 land dust, demonstrating that these anomalies are a worldwide 

 phenomenon. 



Dr. Merrihue developed a new technique for studying meteorites. 

 It consists of doing mass spectroscopy on the noble gases from neutron- 

 irradiated samples. With this technique he obtained a number of 

 important results: First, the chondrules in meteorites are systematically 

 enriched in radiogenic xenon-129, and are depleted in primordial 

 xenon. This is evidence for an early high-temperature origin. Second 

 the matrix materials in meteorites, on the other hand, show evidence of 

 being formed at a lower temperature in equilibrium with solar gas. 

 Third, the variations in the xenon-129/xenon-132 ratios as a function 

 of temperature prove that the radiogenic xenon-129 results from in situ 

 decay of iodine-129. Fourth, since both the xenon and the xenon-129 

 are highest in minerals with the highest diffusion constants, there 

 appears to be negligible xenon diffusion since the decay of iodine-129. 

 Fifth, the chondrules show spallation-type anomalies in krypton and 

 xenon that cannot be attributed to recent cosmic rays and may be 

 evidence for a primordial irradiation by high-energy protons. In 

 addition, the mass spectroscopy of noble gases from neutron -irradiated 

 meteorite samples provides information on the abundances of iodine, 

 bromine, selenium, and tellurium and is an interesting method for 

 potassium-argon dating. This method for potassium-argon dating 

 offers two important advantages over conventional methods. First, 

 potassium and argon are simultaneously determined by a single 



11 Supported in part by grant G-16067 from the National Science Foundation. 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 219 



measurement on the same sample. Second, the absolute abundances 

 of neither the potassium nor the argon are required. 



Dr. Merrihue also built the rare-gas extraction and sample prepara- 

 tion system for the Observatory's mass spectrometer, thus aiding studies 

 of rare gases from dust samples. 11 And he initiated a program for the 

 analysis of halogens in meteorites and separate fractions of meteorites. 



With James G. D' Amico, Dr. Fireman is measuring radioactivities in 

 recently fallen chondritic meteorites, using a gamma-gamma coinci- 

 dence spectrometer. Studying sodium-22 and aluminum-26 in par- 

 ticular, they find evidence that there may be a slight variation in the 

 radioactivities of these two isotopes that is related to the orbits of bodies 

 in space. 



A new iron-silicate mineral containing essential potassium was found 

 by scientists at the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories and 

 was analyzed by Mrs. Ursula B. Marvin. 12 The X-ray determinations 

 showed that the mineral, which occurs in the Meso-Madaras chondrite, 

 has the same structure as a synthetic potassium-magnesium silicate 

 and is the first meteoritic mineral known to concentrate potassium. It 

 was named Merrihueite. 



In collaboration with scientists at the General Electric Research 

 Laboratory in Schenectady, N.Y., Mrs. Marvin investigated meteoritic 

 minerals by the fission-trace method. Data indicate that uranium is 

 not dispersed in meteorites, as was formerly believed, but rather con- 

 centrated in certain minor accessory minerals, particularly whitlockite 

 and zircon. These can contain up to 4,000 parts per million, but 

 uranium is essentially absent from other minerals, including both olivine 

 and quartz. The data also reveal that many meteoritic minerals 

 contain excess fission tracks resulting from the spontaneous decay of 

 some element other than uranium-238. The element may be extinct 

 plutonium-244, which contributed to the track density early in the 

 history of the universe. 



Dr. Whipple and Dr. Fireman have analyzed data on the cosmic -ray 

 exposure ages of meteorites and have found evidence for space erosion 

 of meteoroids. The estimated erosion rate is approximately 10~ 8 cm. 

 per year for irons and 10~ 7 for stones. 



Dr. Matthias F. Comerford has conducted preliminary laboratory 

 experiments to determine the relative erosion rates of different meteoroid 

 classes. His early results indicate that a simple weighting technique 

 will provide an adequate measure of mass loss, at least for brittle ma- 

 terials. His work is proceeding in cooperation with Dr. H. Mark at 

 NASA's Lewis Research Center. 



12 Supported in part by grant NsG 282-63 from NASA to Dr. Clifford Frondel of 

 Harvard University. 




220 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Dr. Comerford has also begun making microstructural studies and 

 measurements of annealing kinetics in metals and alloys to help 

 explain recovery and recrystallization phenomena and to identify 

 the processes involved. Such information is fundamental to a proper 

 interpretation of the structures observed in iron meteorites. 



Dr. Paul W. Hodge and Dr. Frances W. Wright have completed 

 surface analyses, by the electron-beam microanalyzer technique, of 

 about 270 dust particles that probably are primarily cosmic in origin. 

 To substantiate that probability, they are now working on similar 

 analyses of the interiors of 23 spherules that had previously been sub- 

 ject to surface analyses. To establish finally whether or not a volcanic 

 origin is possible for the majority of spherules recovered in arctic ice 

 deposits, they are continuing their investigation of volcanic spherules; 

 results to date make a volcanic origin extremely unlikely. 



Dr. Joseph Goldstein redetermined the Fe-Ni phase diagram at 

 temperatures above 500° C. The new phase diagram can be extrap- 

 olated to 300°G. and suggests that the a/a -\- y boundary bends 

 back to lower Ni concentrations above 400°C. He also measured the 

 inter diffusion coefficients for the Fe-Ni system at 1 atm. and 40 

 kilobar pressures. With the newly determined phase diagram and 

 diffusion coefficients he calculated the concentration gradients in 

 meteoritic kamacite. The results show a Ni depletion in the kama- 

 cite near the a/y interface below 450 °C. because the kamacite cannot 

 remain in equilibrium at low cooling temperatures and because of a 

 number of other features of the kamacite phase. Electron-probe 

 measurements on several metallic meteorites when compared to his 

 predicted features of the kamacite phase agree with cooling rates of 

 small bodies, indicating a low-pressure formation. 



Basing his work on a broad range of observational data, Dr. G. 

 Colombo has conducted a theoretical investigation of the dynamics of 

 dust particles orbiting in the vicinity of the earth. He and his co- 

 workers, Dr. Don Lautman and Irwin Shapiro of the M.I.T. Lincoln 

 Laboratory, conclude that more observational data from ground, 

 rocket, and satellite experiments are much needed. 



Under the direction of Dr. Nathaniel P. Carleton and Dr. Charles 

 H. Dugan, laboratory studies of electron impact excitation of metastable 

 levels in atoms and molecules of atmospheric interest have been per- 

 formed. 13 Studies were also made of the chemical reaction of certain 

 of these metastable atoms and molecules. The atmospheric applica- 

 tion of this work concerns the partition of energy supplied to the 



18 Supported by contract AF 19(628)-4203 with the U.S. Air Force. 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 221 



atmosphere by various mechanisms, particularly photo ionization and 

 heating by electric currents in the ionosphere. 



To understand more fully the phenomena of comet nuclei, Dr. 

 Charles A. Whitney, Dr. Charles A. Lundquist, and Douglas T. 

 Pitman are continuing laboratory experiments simulating conditions 

 on the surface of a nucleus. 



Dr. Carl Sagan's laboratory for research in prebiological organic 

 chemistry and related exobiological problems is now in operation. 

 The basic process in the synthesis of organic compounds is the appli- 

 cation of energy, chiefly ultraviolet radiation, to a mixture of molecules 

 simulating features of the primitive environment of the earth or of 

 contemporary planetary environments. Techniques of autoradio- 

 graphic paper chromatography, thin-layer chromatography, and 

 electrophoresis are applicable to these investigations. Some prelimi- 

 nary results on nucleoside and nucleotide synthesis have been obtained. 



Dr. Sagan, working with J. P. Phaneuf and M. Ihnat of the Avco 

 Corporation, has compared the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared 

 reflection spectra of the Martian bright areas with corresponding 

 laboratory reflectivities of a variety of minerals. 14 Except at short 

 visible wavelengths, where the effects of the Martian blue haze are 

 prominent, pulverized limonite matches the shape and amplitude 

 of the Martian Russell-Bond albedo within experimental and obser- 

 vational error. 



FLIGHT OPERATIONS 



Observations made from experiments high in the atmosphere or 

 beyond it can yield information that is impossible to obtain from ground 

 stations. The Observatory is broadening its efforts to obtain such data. 

 To support the activities of these experiments, a new department of 

 flight operations headed by John J. Burke has been established. 



Within this department work is progressing on a variety of flight 

 instruments. Under the supervision of Dr. Giovanni G. Fazio and 

 Dr. Henry F. Helmken, a spark-chamber detector to search for primary 

 gamma rays has been built and is being tested. 15 A balloon flight is 

 scheduled for next year. Dr. Fazio and Dr. Comerford are investigating 

 detectors to measure polarization of celestial X-ray sources. 



The purpose of Project Celescope is to construct an accurate photo- 

 metric map of the sky in each of four ultraviolet wavelength bands. 10 



14 Research sponsored by a fellowship from the Alfred P. Sloane Foundation. 

 18 Supported by contracts NAS5-3255 and NAS5-9769 with NASA Goddard 

 Space Flight Center. 

 18 Supported by contract NAS5-1535 with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. 




222 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



This program, under the scientific direction of Dr. Robert J. Davis, 

 requires the use of sophisticated television techniques and the establish- 

 ment of an accurate absolute standard of spectrophotometric sensitivity 

 as a function of wavelength between 1000 and 3000 angstroms. The 

 Celescope experiment has been rescheduled for installation aboard 

 the third Orbiting Astronomical Observatory satellite, to be launched 

 in 1 967. Preliminary experiments may also be conducted from balloons 

 and rockets. 



Under Harvard auspices, Dr. Leo Goldberg and his group have 

 designed and partially constructed a spectrometer-spectroheliometer 

 which will be flown on the Orbiting Solar Observatory D satellite. 17 

 This instrument is an improved version of the earlier OSO-BII experi- 

 ment, which failed early in 1965 during its first orbits. Its purpose is to 

 investigate the structure of the sun's outer atmosphere and to study the 

 physical processes occurring in solar flares. 



STELLAR AND PLANETARY OBSERVATIONS 



Using several observational facilities, including the Kitt Peak National 

 Observatory, Dr. Goldberg has been dealing with astrophysical im- 

 plications of autoionization in atomic spectra. A considerable number 

 of previously unobserved and unidentified features have been found in 

 the solar spectrum. The profiles of the Ca I triplet near X 6350, recently 

 identified by Mitchell and Mohler, have also been traced at various 

 points along the solar radius and are being studied with the aid of 

 absolute f-values measured by Mr. Gerald Newson in the Shock Tube 

 Laboratory. 18 



A project has been established under the general direction of Dr. 

 Stephen Strom and the specific direction of David W. Latham to de- 

 velop instrumentation for obtaining highly accurate stellar continuous 

 spectra. A prototype photomultiplier cooling package with careful 

 temperature control has been designed by Thomas E. Hoffman and 

 is being constructed. A data reduction scheme has been formulated 

 by Mr. Latham, a semiautomatic data acquisition system has been 

 perfected, and a monochromator is being built. 



The Observatory has supported the design and preliminary construc- 

 tion of an infrared camera for Dr. Sagan's group. The camera is 

 intended to obtain photographs of the moon and planets at several 

 narrow-band wavelength intervals in the photographic infrared. The 

 system is planned to be flexible for adaptation to a variety of large 



17 Supported by contract NASw-184 between NASA and Harvard University. 



18 Supported by grant NsG 438 from NASA to Harvard University. 




ASTROPHYSIGAL OBSERVATORY 223 



telescopes and will accommodate six interference filters on a filter 

 wheel. 



Dr. Fazio and Dr. Helmken have used the large (28-ft. square) 

 parabolic mirror system at the U.S. Army Natick Laboratories to detect 

 air cerenkov light from cosmic -ray particles striking the atmosphere 

 and producing charged particle showers. Significant improvements in 

 detection ability were achieved during the year. 



One major result of observational work has been the preparation of 

 an atlas of the Large Magellanic Cloud by Dr. Hodge and Dr. Wright. 

 The atlas includes a historical account of research on the Cloud, 

 together with a summary of current knowledge; a complete bibliog- 

 raphy of papers on this subject from 1925 through 1964; and 167 

 photographic charts on which have been identified known variable 

 stars, star clusters, and emission nebulae. When the work is pub- 

 lished, it should serve as a "clearing house" for information on these 

 phenomena. 



Dr. Whitney and his group working in theoretical astrophysics 

 have developed two observational programs: 19 



1. Use of existing equipment and other optical observatories 

 under guest investigator programs. Dr. Strom, Mr. Latham, and 

 Dr. Whitney obtained spectrographic data at the McDonald Observa- 

 tory, the Kitt Peak National Observatory, and the Mt. Wilson Ob- 

 servatory. Dr. Strom and Mr. Latham have developed extensive 

 computer programs to handle the reduction of these data. 



2. Development of auxiliary equipment for the measurement of 

 stellar spectra. As the first step in this program, Mr. Latham and Mr. 

 Hoffman are constructing the photoelectric spectrometer mentioned 

 earlier. Under this program they envisage the continuing develop- 

 ment of various optical detectors to elucidate empirical questions 

 raised by the theoretical program and to explore new avenues of 

 observation. 



Dr. Sagan, Steven Kilston of Harvard College, and R. R. Drummond 

 of the Goddard Space Flight Center undertook a search for life on 

 Earth at km. resolution using photographs obtained by the Tiros and 

 Nimbus meteorological satellites. Of several thousand photographs 

 of essentially cloudless terrains taken by Nimbus I, two objects were 

 found that were indicative of intelligent life on Earth: a jet contrail 

 and a recently constructed interstate highway. One rectilinear 

 feature was found on the Moroccan coast; it was not, however, due 

 to the works of man. No signs of seasonal variation of vegetation 

 could be found, although one rectilinear array due to the activities 



19 Supported by grants GP-940 and GP-4318 from the National Science Founda- 

 tion. 




224 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



of Canadian loggers was discovered on a Tiros II photograph. It 

 appears that several thousand photographs of the Earth, each with a 

 resolution of a few tenths of a km., are required before any sign of 

 intelligent life can be found with some reasonable reliability. An 

 equivalent Mariner IV system — taking 22 photographs of the Earth 

 with a resolution of several km. — would not detect any sign of life on 

 Earth, intelligent or otherwise. 



THEORETICAL ASTROPHYSICS 



In a paper presented before the Thirteenth International Astro- 

 physical Symposium organized by PInstitut d'Astrophysique of the 

 University of Liege in Belgium, the director and Diarmaid H. Douglas- 

 Hamilton of the Harvard College Observatory corrected visual bright- 

 ness estimates of Comets Encke and Faye for telescope aperture and 

 reduced them to absolute magnitude. A secular decrease in absolute 

 brightness is indicated for both. On the assumption of a linear de- 

 crease with time in the diameter of an icy nucleus, they calculated 

 death dates of 1991 to 2000 for Comet Encke, and 1978 to 1985 for 

 Comet Faye. 



They find no correlation between the brightness variations of the 

 two comets and solar activity. On the other hand, for Comet Encke 

 they find that the observed occurrence of a tail is strongly correlated 

 with increased solar activity and with the observed presence of a 

 distinct sharp nucleus. They suggest that variations in the solar 

 wind may produce these effects. 



The director presented before the Symposium on Unmanned Ex- 

 ploration of the Solar System, held by the American Astronomical 

 Society in Denver, Colo., a description of cometry phenomena and of 

 the probable basic nature of comets, and offered proposals for further 

 investigations by improved classical astronomical methods, by labora- 

 tory studies, by observations from balloons, by artificial comet ex- 

 periments in space, by observations from space platforms, and by 

 space probes passing near comets. These techniques should add signifi- 

 cantly to our knowledge of the cometry nucleus and of possible cometary 

 hazards to spacecraft, as well as to the possibility of using comets as 

 fuel sources for interplanetary operation and exploration. 



From time to time a comet nucleus is observed to break into several 

 pieces. Sometimes two or more comets are thus formed which sub- 

 sequently follow nearly identical orbits. At other times the original 

 comet simply vanishes, leaving only the suspicion that its nucleus 

 fragmented. Dr. Whipple and Robert P. Stefanik have been conduct- 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 225 



ing a study of 12 such split comets. The fact that these appear to be 

 "new" rather than periodic comets leads to the suggestion that early 

 in its life each of these fragmented comets was a large dirty snowball 

 containing a source of heat in radioactive atoms. Planetary encounters 

 eject the comet far out of the solar system and into interstellar space 

 where sublimation of the more volatile materials depletes the core 

 over a long time interval. Diffusing outward through the nucleus, 

 the gases recrystallize in the extreme cold near the comet's surface to 

 form an external shell that is brittle and a structurally weakened core. 

 During its long stay in interstellar space, the comet is affected by 

 virtually no external physical forces. Thus on its first close approach 

 to the sun, exposure to strong external radiation may result in the 

 formation of heat shock that causes the comet to split. 



Before the Third International Symposium on Bioastronautics 

 and the Exploration of Space, held at San Antonio, Tex., the director 

 revised historically the predictions of meteoroid penetration of space 

 vehicles near the Earth's orbit and then compared the predictions with 

 observational data from satellites. He concluded that the hazard is 

 far less than it was thought to be several years ago. 



Prof. Prabhu L. Bhatnagar of the Indian Institute of Science was a 

 distinguished visiting scientist at the Observatory during the summer 

 and fall of 1964. He directed his attention to the problem of deriving 

 a precise theory of the radiation transfer problem in the lunar surface, 

 in which the lunar surface density is constant, varies linearly with 

 depth, and varies exponentially with depth. The methods are being 

 programed for utilization of infrared and radio observations, both 

 throughout a lunation and during eclipses. The director cooperated 

 in this research. 



Research in cosmology and general relativity proceeded along several 

 paths. Dr. James P. Wright and Dr. Sachiko Tsuruta evaluated the 

 pulsation periods of relativistic objects, paying particular attention to 

 neutron stars where the whole star may pulsate in 0.001 second. The 

 stability of superdense stars was studied using conventional trial 

 functions corresponding to homologous oscillation, and further work 

 indicates the need to use more elaborate trial functions. Dr. Wright 

 also investigated the role of rotation in a particular relativistic model 

 of the universe. 



Dr. Tsuruta evaluated the neutrino energy loss from stars through the 

 so-called URGA (uniform rapid contraction) process for ordinary and 

 dense matter in the temperature range T = 10 9 °K to T = 5 X 10 9 

 °K and of the density range p = 10 6 grams-cm. 3 to 3 X 10 u grams- 

 cm. 3 . This energy loss rate is highly sensitive to temperature, and 

 above a temperature of 2 to 3 X 10 9 °K the nuclear URGA process 



789-427—66 26 




226 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



exceeds the energy loss by the plasma-neutrino process; therefore the 

 URGA process must be taken into account in detailed calculations of 

 stellar evolution at high densities and temperatures. Dr. Tsuruta 

 finds that inclusion of this new process does not significantly alter her 

 earlier conclusions concerning the rate of cooling of neutron stars. 

 She has found that stars of medium and heavy mass retain temperatures 

 exceeding 2 X 10 9 °K for times of the order of 10 4 to 10 5 years, so such 

 stars should be considered as candidates for some of the observed 

 X-ray sources. 



Dr. Henri E. Mitler has made considerable progress in his study of 

 neutron activation of nuclei in meteoroids from solar and galactic 

 cosmic rays. He has found a relatively simple analytical method for 

 obtaining the total number of neutrons, protons, and heavier particles 

 evaporated from excited nuclei and has obtained an improved neutron 

 production spectrum. He has also solved the problem of spallation 

 production of nuclei in spherical meteoroids by cosmic rays and will 

 apply this as a test of the space erosion theory by Dr. Whipple and Dr. 

 Fireman. 



Dr. William M. Irvine completed a study of local irregularities in 

 cosmological models according to general relativity. Conditions were 

 derived for the validity of Newtonian gravitational theory on a local 

 scale in such a universe, and it was shown that such models satisfy 

 Mach's principle. The energy of the irregularities in such a universe 

 is not conserved, a fact of significance to cosmogony. 



Research in stellar atmospheres, under the general supervision of 

 Dr. Whitney, now comprises perhaps the strongest theoretical program 

 of its kind in the world. 19 To supplement this theoretical work, the 

 observational program previously mentioned was initiated this year. 

 An event of particular note was the second Harvard-Smithsonian con- 

 ference on stellar atmospheres, held at the Observatories in January. 20 

 This meeting was organized by Dr. Whitney, Dr. Eugene H. Avrett, 

 and Dr. Owen J. Gingerich; the proceedings, published as Special 

 Report No. 174, contained over 450 pages summarizing 3 days' dis- 

 cussion of problems of the formation of spectrum lines. This conference 

 series has clearly been adopted as an "Institution" by the astronomical 

 community. 



The theoretical work of the Observatory's group was aimed primarily 

 at uncovering the effects of departures from local thermodynamic equi- 

 librium on the formation of spectrum lines and the continuous spectra 



20 Supported in part by grant NONR(G)0031-65 from the Office of Naval 

 Research. 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 227 



of stars. Also, accurate and powerful techniques for spectrum analysis 

 have been brought to bear on problems of stellar composition. 



Dr. Avrett has made considerable progress in the calculation of strong 

 absorption at emission lines formed in the outermost layers of stellar 

 atmospheres and has completed an investigation of "source function 

 equality" in multiplet lines. This study is part of a larger project 

 involving radiative transfer calculations of spectra from complex atoms 

 with applications to solar chromospheric lines. In collaboration with 

 Dr. Robert W. Noyes, he is making a detailed analysis of the solar H 

 and K lines of ionized calcium and of magnesium. 



The group devoted a major effort toward examining the validity of 

 model atmosphere techniques and extending these theories and tech- 

 niques to a practical analysis of the spectra of "real" stars. Dr. Wolf- 

 gang Kalkofen continued his investigations of the influence of departures 

 from local thermodynamic equilibrium on the structure of model 

 atmospheres. 21 This theoretical work, done in collaboration with Dr. 

 Avrett, promises to have an important bearing on the quantitative 

 analysis of stellar spectra, as evidenced by recent work of Dr. Strom and 

 Dr. Gingerich. 



Dr. Strom and Dr. Gingerich have nearly completed an analysis of 

 the spectra of Sirius and Vega, two bright stars whose surface tempera- 

 tures are about 10,000°K. This will be the most thorough study ever 

 performed for any star other than the sun. Two principal results have 

 emerged from this study. In the first place, it is quite clear that Sirius 

 has a metal content similar to that of metallic-line A stars and much 

 higher than that of Vega. Second, there were significant discrepancies 

 in the results in the analyses which were removed when the departures 

 from local thermodynamic equilibrium for the second and third levels 

 of neutral hydrogen were explicitly included. The magnitude of this 

 effect will be appreciated when it is noted that the new models alter 

 the estimates of surface temperature for these stars by about 1,000°K, 

 and may indicate that there will be a significant revision of the stellar 

 temperature scale. 19 



Dr. Whitney's theoretical work was aimed at providing insight into 

 dynamical properties of stellar atmospheres and the general problem 

 of gas dynamic flow in the presence of radiative transfer. 



Dr. Noyes continued his theoretical and observational studies of the 

 solar atmosphere. He and Dr. Whitney organized an informal 

 symposium on "motions in the solar atmosphere" to which a small 

 number of specialists throughout the country were invited. 



21 Supported in part by contract AF 19(628)-3877 between the U.S. Air Force 

 and Harvard University. 




228 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Dr. George B. Rybicki derived radiative transfer equations for a 

 medium with small stochastically defined opacity and energy fluctua- 

 tions. The theory is shown to provide a description of the solar 

 atmosphere which has statistically defined inhomogeneities due to an 

 underlying convection zone. An unexpected result is that long-range 

 correlations in the emergent intensity may appear that are not directly 

 related to the correlation scales in the energy fluctuations. Rather, 

 they are related to the depth of the zone in which the energy fluctua- 

 tions occur, even if this is large in comparison with a radiation mean- 

 free path. 



Dr. Irvine pursued his fundamental studies of scattering phenomena 

 in planetary atmospheres. He developed a new approach to the 

 study of the formation of absorption bands in a scattering atmosphere 

 through equations for the probability distribution of photon-optical 

 paths. Also, radiative transfer in layers of large particles (dust or 

 clouds) was invesitgated with an explicit evaluation of the influence 

 of the large forward lobe in the scattering pattern. Dr. Irvine com- 

 puted the cross sections for extinction, scattering, and radiation pressure 

 for both dielectric and absorbing particles and included the contribu- 

 tion of surface waves to the scattering. As an aid to the study of 

 planetary cloud and dust layers, he evaluated the albedo and asym- 

 metry factor of water droplets and sand spheres. 22 



Analyzing recent passive and active radio observations of Mars, Dr. 

 Sagan and Dr. James B. Pollack have found a significant correlation of 

 radar reflectivity enhancements with the Martian dark areas Cerberus- 

 Trivium Gharontis, Nepenthes, and Syrtis Major. 



They have also continued their study of the physical environment of 

 the planet Venus. They have estimated surface thermometric tem- 

 peratures to be as follows: mean disk, 700°K; subsolar point, 1000°K; 

 antisolar point, 610°K; pole, 470°K. They have shown that the 

 Venus limb-darkening detected by Mariner II can be explained 

 consistently either by an absorbing cloud or by scatterers nonuni- 

 formly distributed through the atmosphere. Reconsidering the Venus 

 greenhouse effect, they find that cloudless atmospheres, either in 

 convective or in radiative equilibrium, require, to explain the high 

 surface temperatures, integrated infrared optical depths much larger 

 than is realistically expected from the constituents of the Venus atmos- 

 phere. If the Venus clouds are made of water, many of the cloud 

 parameters can be derived from the observations; such clouds play 

 a major role in maintaining the high surface temperatures of Venus. 



M Supported in part by grant NsG 89/60 from NASA to Harvard University. 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 229 



HISTORICAL ASTRONOMY 



Dr. Hawkins has developed a computer program in astroarcheology 

 that determines the position on the celestial sphere that is marked by a 

 chosen line on the ground. The stones, stone holes, and archways at 

 Stonehenge in England revealed a surprising fit with the extreme 

 positions of sunrise, sunset, moonrise, and moonset. Also, the circle of 

 56 holes is exactly the number required to predict the swing of the 

 moon and the occurrence of eclipse seasons. This observatory-com- 

 puter is a remarkable achievement for circa 2000 B.C. Similar align- 

 ments and computer possibilities were found from the stone rows and 

 rings at Callanish, on the Isle of Lewis, Scotland. The program has 

 been made available to other scientists, and already investigations 

 using it have been made in Illinois, in Mexico, and elsewhere. 



Dr. Gingerich has undertaken an extensive study of Kepler's 

 Astronomia Nova that should ultimately result in the first English 

 translation of and commentary on this classic treatise. This work is an 

 outgrowth of a previous computer study that indicated Kepler's 

 work on the orbit of Mars was greatly impeded by his frequent nu- 

 merical errors. Dr. Gingerich has also been examining, with the aid 

 of a computer, Kepler's Rudolphine Tables of 1627 to determine the 

 internal consistency of the calculations and their accuracy for pre- 

 dicting planetary positions. 23 



INTERNATIONAL BUREAUS 



Recognizing the Observatory's active and productive program in 

 geodesy, the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics invited 

 the Observatory to establish a Central Bureau of Satellite Geodesy. 

 The Bureau is now in operation, with Dr. Whipple as director and 

 Jan RolfF as executive director. 24 



On January 1 , the Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams was 

 transferred to the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory from the 

 Copenhagen Observatory, where it had operated since 1922. The 

 Bureau's responsibilities include the rapid dissemination of astronomical 

 information both by telegraph and by printed circulars, as well as the 

 nomenclature of comets. Under the direction of Dr. Gingerich, the 

 Bureau had issued 30 circulars by the end of the year. 25 



23 Supported in part by Harvard University. 



24 Supported in part by the International Association of Geodesy. 



25 Supported in part by the International Astronomical Union. 




230 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



STAFF CHANGES 



The Observatory staff was increased during the year by physicists 

 Dr. Wolfgang Kalkofen, Dr. Anthony Lee, Dr. James Pollack, Dr. 

 George Rybicki, Dr. Sachiko Tsuruta, Dr. Franco Verniani, and Dr. 

 James Wright; astrophysicist Dr. Max Roemer; geodesist Dr. William 

 Strange; and mathematician Dr. Manfred Friedman. John Burke 

 joined the staff as flight operations manager, William Hirst as chief 

 of Moon watch, Thomas Hoffman as staff engineer, John Hsia as chief 

 of station operations, and Raymond Watts, Jr., as chief of editorial 

 and publications. 



The computations, data, and photoreduction divisions became the 

 data processing department under Dr. Richard Haefner. Edward 

 Gaposchkin and Leonard Solomon joined research and analysis, and 

 Jerome Cherniack became chief of computations and Robert Martin 

 chief of data. E. Nelson Hayes became editor-in-chief. Jan Rolff 

 was appointed executive director of the Central Bureau for Satellite 

 Geodesy. 



Consultants to the Observatory during the year were Dr. G. 

 de Vaucouleurs, Dr. William Kaula, Dr. Colin Keay, Daniel 

 Malaise, Dr. Shambhu Sinvhal, Dr. George Veis, Dr. John Wood, 

 and Costas Papaliolios. 



Metallurgist Dr. Joseph Goldstein transferred to Goddard Space 

 Flight Center. Physicist Jack Tech transferred from and returned 

 to the National Bureau of Standards during the year. Moonwatch 

 chief Richard Vanderburgh and physicists Dr. Morton Davies and 

 Dr. William Elford resigned. 



As of June 30, 1965, the Observatory employed 468 persons. 



Death took two young Observatory scientists in 1965. 



Dr. Craig M. Merrihue, physicist, and associate of Harvard 

 University, died in a mountain-climbing accident March 14, 1965. 

 Born in Schenectady, N.Y., July 8, 1933, he was awarded the B.A. 

 degree from Harvard University in 1956 and the Ph.D. from the 

 University of California at Berkeley in 1964. He lived in Cambridge 

 with his wife Sandra and their son Jeffrey. In his short career, he 

 demonstrated an unusual combination of theoretical skills and ex- 

 perimental aptitude and made important contributions to science, 

 particularly in the analysis of radioisotopes in meterorites. He was a 

 quiet, modest, unassuming man with intense enthusiasm for life. 

 He was deeply involved in the public problems of his time, taking an 

 active interest in conservation, civil liberties, and political issues. He 

 was concerned alike for the individual and for society. A skillful 

 mountain climber, he had led an expedition to the Andes, had climbed 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 231 



in British Columbia and in the Karakoram in Pakistan, and was 

 planning an expedition to the Hindu Kush in Afghanistan. While he 

 and Daniel Doody, a member of the American Everest Expedition, 

 were climbing on the side of Mt. Washington, they both fell and were 

 killed. Because of his theoretical interests and practical skills as a 

 scientist, and because of his experience as a mountain climber, Dr. 

 Merrihue was a conspicuous candidate for the position of scientist on 

 America's first manned expedition to the Moon. 



On April 21, 1965, Imre Izsak, chief of satellite research and analysis, 

 and lecturer at Harvard University, died of a heart attack at the age 

 of 36. He was in Paris attending a COSPAR symposium on tra- 

 jectories of artificial celestial bodies as determined from observations. 

 In the brief years of his scientific career, he had established himself 

 as a preeminent authority on geodesy and had made significant con- 

 tributions to the study of celestial mechanics. His death is both a 

 deep personal tragedy and an irreparable loss to the scientific com- 

 munity. Born in the small town of Zalaegerszeg, some 200 miles 

 from Budapest, Izsak attended the University of Budapest, where he 

 worked in astronomy under the late Karoly Lassovszky (who also 

 later joined the Smithsonian) and specialized in the study of variable 

 stars and galactic clusters. Fleeing Hungary during the 1956 revolt, 

 he began studies of solar physics at the Zurich Observatory in Novem- 

 ber of that year. Two years later he emigrated to the United States 

 and, after a brief priod at the Observatory of the University of Cincin- 

 nati, joined the staff of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. 

 On February 24, 1964, he became a citizen of the United States. 

 He lived in Cambridge with his wife Emily and an infant son Andrew. 

 Izsak was a warm, charming, witty, gentle person. He gained not 

 only the deep respect but also the spontaneous affection of his col- 

 leagues. His association with them was one of mutual inspiration. 



PUBLICATIONS 



The following papers by staff members of the Astrophysical Observa- 

 tory were published or presented as indicated: 



Aardoom, L.; Girnius, A.; and Veis, G. Determination of the absolute 

 space directions between Baker-Nunn camera stations. Presented 

 at the Second International Symposium on the Use of Artificial 

 Satellites for Geodesy, Athens, April 1965. 

 Avrett, E. H., and Strom, S. E. Comparison between model atmos- 

 pheres and spectra from early-type stars. Ann. d'Astrophys., vol. 

 27, pp. 781-795, 1964. 

 . See also Kalkofen and Avrett; Strom and Avrett. 




232 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Carleton, N. P. Excitation and change of charge in ion molecule 

 collisions in the adiabatic region. In M. R. C. McDowell, ed., Atomic 

 Collision Processes, J. Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, pp. 652-660, 

 1964. 



Carleton, N. P.; Oldenberg, O.; and Sheridan, W. F. Secondary 

 effects in electron excitation of some nitrogen bands. In M. R. G. 

 McDowell, ed., Atomic Collision Processes, J. Wiley & Sons, Inc., 

 New York, pp. 440-442, 1964. 



Garleton, N. P., and Roach, J. R. Spectroscopic observation of a 

 midlatitude red auroral arc. Journ. Geophys. Res., vol. 70, pp. 

 1262-1265, 1965. 



Colombo, G., and Fiocco, G. Reply to "Note on Kazer detection of 

 atmospheric dust layers" by D. Deirmendjian. Journ. Geophys. 

 Res., vol. 70, p. 746, 1965. 



Colombo, G.; Lautman, D. A.; and Shapiro, I. I. Dynamics of small 

 particles in the solar system. Presented at the annual meeting of 

 Trans. Amer. Geophys. Union, Washington, April 21, 1965. 



DeFelice, J. See Fireman and DeFelice; Fireman, DeFelice, and 

 Langway. 



Dolan, J. F., and Fazio, G. G. Gamma-ray spectrum of the sun. 

 Rev. Geophys., vol. 3, pp. 319-343, 1965. 



Elford, W. G., and Hawkins, G. S. Meteor echo rates and the flux 

 of sporadic meteors. Harvard Radio Meteor Project Research 

 Report No. 9, November 1964. 



Elford, W. G.; Hawkins, G. S.; and Southworth, R. B. The dis- 

 tribution of sporadic meteor radiants. Harvard Radio Meteor Proj- 

 ect Research Report No. 11, December 1964. 



Fazio, G. G. A vidicon spark chamber system for use in artificial earth 

 satellites. Proc. Symp. on Filmless Spark Chamber Techniques and 

 Associated Computer Uses. CERN, Geneva, pp. 95-103, 1964. 



. See also Dolan and Fazio; Pollack and Fazio. 



Fireman, E. L., and DeFelice, J. Multiple fall of Pribram meteorites 

 photographed 7. The tritium and argon-39 in the Pribram meteorite 

 (abstract). Bull. Astron. Insts. Czech., vol. 15, p. 113, 1964. 



Fireman, E. L.; DeFelice, J.; and Langway, C. C, jr. Greenland 

 dust: radioactivity studies (abstract). Trans. Amer. Geophys. Union, 

 vol. 46, p. 117, 1964. 



Fireman, E. L., and Langway, C. C, jr. Search for aluminum-26 

 in dust from the Greenland Ice Sheet. Geochim. et. Cosmochim. 

 Acta, vol. 29, pp. 21-27, 1965. 



. See also Schaeffer, Stoenner, and Fireman. 



Fleischer, R. L.; Naeser, C. W.; Price, P. B.; Walker, R. M.; and 

 Marvin, U. B. Fossil particle tracks and uranium distributions in 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 233 



minerals of the Vaca Muerta meteorite. Science, vol. 148, pp. 

 629-632, 1965. 



Franklin, F. A. See Wright, Hodge, and Franklin. 



Friedman, M. P. A description of a computer program for the study 

 of atmospheric effects on sonic booms. NASA CR-157, February 

 1965. 



Gingerich, O. Laboratory exercises in astronomy — spectral classifi- 

 cation. Sky and Tel., vol. 28, pp. 80-82, 1964. 



•. Laboratory exercises in astronomy — the rotation of Saturn 



and its rings. Sky and Tel., vol. 28, pp. 278-279, 1964. 



. Translation of Introduction to Astrophysics: the Stars, 



by J. Dufay. Dover Press, New York, 1964. 

 . Lunar visibilities in ancient Babylon. Isis, March 1965. 



Gingerich, O.; Mihalas, D.; Matsushima, S.; and Strom, S. An 



archetype non-gray stellar atmosphere. Astrophys. Journ., vol. 



141, pp. 316-319, 1965. 



. See also Strom, Gingerich, and Strom. 



Girnius, A. See Aardoom, Girnius, and Veis. 



Goldberg, L. The origin of the emission reversals in the Fraunhofer 



H- and K-lines. Astrophys. Journ., vol. 140, pp. 384-386, 1964. 

 Goldberg, L., and Noyes, R. W. Origin of emission cores in lines of 



ionized Ca and Mg (abstract). Astron. Journ., vol. 69, p. 542, 1964. 

 Goldberg, L.; Parkinson, W. N.; and Reeves, E. M. Carbon mon- 

 oxide in the ultraviolet solar spectrum. Astrophys. Journ., vol. 



141, pp. 1293-1295, 1965. 

 Goldstein, J. I.; Hanneman, R. E.; and Ogilivie, R E. Diffusion in 



the Fe-Ni system at 1 atm. and 40 kbar pressure. Trans, AIME, vol. 



233, pp. 812-820, 1965. 

 Haefner, R. R. The simultaneous observation program of the 



Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Presented at the Second 



International Symposium on the Use of Artificial Satellites for 



Geodesy, Athens, April 1965. 

 . Precise reduction of Baker-Nunn films at the Smithsonian 



Astrophysical Observatory. Presented at the Second International 



Symposium on the Use of Artificial Satellites for Geodesy, Athens, 



April 1965. 

 Hawkins, G. S. Interplanetary debris near the earth. Ann. Rev. 



Astron. Astrophys., vol. 2, pp. 149-164, 1964. 



. Letter to the Editor. Physics Today, vol. 17, p. 56, 1964. 



. Secret of Stonehenge. Harpers, pp. 96-99, June 1964. 



. Meteors, comets, and meteorites. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New 



York, 1964. 




234 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Hawkins, G. S. The sun and its planets. Holt, Rinehart, Winston, 

 New York, 1964. 



Hawkins, G. S., and Friesen, D. A note on the grid of the ortho- 

 graphic atlas of the moon. Planet. Space Sci., vol. 12, pp. 318-319, 

 1964. 



Hawkins, G. S.; Lindblad, B.-A.; and Southworth, R. B. The 

 velocity of faint meteors. Smithsonian Contr. Astrophys., vol. 8, 

 pp. 133-139, 1964. 



Hawkins, G. S.; Southworth, R. B.; and Rosenthal, S. Prelimin- 

 ary analysis of meteor radiants and orbits. Harvard Radio Meteor 

 Project Research Report No. 7, August 1964. 



Hawkins, G. S.; Southworth, R. B.; and Verniani, F. On the 

 ablation-coefficient of meteors. Harvard Radio Meteor Project 

 Research Report No. 10, December 1964. 



Hawkins, G. S., and Verniani, F. On the ionizing efficiency of 

 meteors. Harvard Radio Meteor Project Research Report No. 5, 

 1964; also in Astrophys. Journ., vol. 140, pp. 1590-1600, 1964. 



. See also Elford and Hawkins; Elford, Hawkins, and South- 

 worth; Verniani and Hawkins. 



Helmken, H. F. See Kraushaar, Clark, Gamire, Helmken, Higbie, and 

 Agogino. 



Hodge, P. W. The Henbury meteorite craters. Smithsonian Contr. 

 Astrophys., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 199-213, 1965. 



Hodge, P. W.; Wright, F. W ; and Langway, C. C, Jr. Studies of 

 particles for extraterrestrial origin. 3. Analyses of dust particles 

 from polar ice deposits. Journ. Geophys. Res., vol. 69, pp. 2919- 

 2931, 1964. 



. See also Wright, Hodge, and Franklin. 



Irvine, W. M. Local irregularities in an expanding universe. Ann. 

 Phys., vol. 32, pp. 322-347, 1965. 



— . Light scattering by spherical particles: radiation pressure, 



asymmetry factor, and extinction cross section. Journ. Opt. Soc. 

 Amer., vol. 55, pp. 16-21, 1965. 



Irvine, W. M. ; Pikoos, C; Charon, J.; and Lectome, G. Effect of 

 high voltage on spectral sensitivity for two photo multipliers. Astro- 

 phys. Journ., vol. 140, pp. 1629-1631, 1964. 



Izsak, I. G. A new determination of non-zonal harmonics by satel- 

 lites. Presented posthumously at the Second International Sym- 

 posium on the Use of Artificial Satellites for Geodesy, Athens, 

 April 1965. 



Izsak, I. G.; Gerard, J.; and Barnett, M. P. Mechanization of 

 tedious algebra. Communications of the ACM, vol. 8, pp. 27-32, 

 1965. 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 235 



Jacchia, L. G. The temperature above the thermopause. In P. 



Muller, ed., Space Research V, North-Holland Publ., Amsterdam, 



pp. 1152-1174, 1965. 

 Jacchia, L. G., and Slowey, J. Temperature variations in the 



upper atmosphere during geomagnetically quiet intervals. Journ. 



Geophys. Res., vol. 69, pp. 4145-4148, 1964. 

 Kalkofen, W., and Avrett, E. H. Departures from L.T.E. in a 



model atmosphere (abstract). Astron. Journ., vol. 69, p. 546, 1964. 

 Kohnlein, W. Determination of station coordinates from optical 



observations of artificial satellites. Presented at the Second Inter- 

 national Symposium on the Use of Artificial Satellites for Geodesy, 



Athens, April 1965. 

 Kozai, Y. New determination of zonal harmonics coefficients of the 



earth's gravitational potential. Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan, vol. 16, 



pp. 263-284, 1964. 

 . New values for the zonal harmonics. Presented at the 



Second International Symposium on the Use of Artificial Satellites 



for Geodesy, Athens, April 1965. 



Summary of numerical results derived from satellite obser- 



vations. Presented at the Second International Symposium on the 

 Use of Artificial Satellites for Geodesy, Athens, April 1965. 



Long range analysis of satellite observations. Presented at 



the Second International Symposium on the Use of Artificial Satel- 

 lites for Geodesy, Athens, April 1965. 

 Kraushaar, W.; Clark, G.; Gamire, G.; Helmken, H. F.; Higbie, 



P.; and Agogino, M. Explorer XI experiment on cosmic gamma 



rays. Astrophys. Journ., vol. 141, pp. 845-863, 1965. 

 Langway, C. C, Jr., and Marvin, U. B. Some characteristics of 



black spherules. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 119, pp. 205-223, 1964. 

 Langway, G. C, jr. See also Fireman and Langway; Fireman, 



DeFelice, and Langway. 

 Lautman, D. A. See Colombo, Lautman, and Shapiro. 

 Lundquist, C. A. Orbital mechanics. Part IV of E. Stuhlinger and 



G. Mesmer, eds., Space Science and Engineering. McGraw-Hill 



Book Co., New York, 1965. 

 Marvin, U. B., and Klein, C, jr. Meteoritic zircon. Science, vol. 



146, pp. 919-920, 1964. 

 . See also Fleischer, Naeser, Price, Walker, and Marvin; 



Langway and Marvin. 

 Merrihue, C. M. Rare gas evidence for cosmic dust in modern 



Pacific red clay. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 119, pp. 351-367, 1964. 

 McCrosky, R. E., and Boeschenstein, H. jr. The Prairie Meteorite 




236 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Network. Journ. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instr. Engrs., vol. 3, pp. 127- 



132, 1965. 

 Mitler, H. E. Origin of light elements. Phys. Rev., vol. 136, pp. 



298-320, 1964. 

 Noyes, R. W. See Goldberg and Noyes. 

 Pollack, J. B., and Fazio, G. G. Nuclear interactions of cosmic rays 



as the source of the synchrotron radiating particles of our galaxy. 



Astrophys. Journ., vol. 141, pp. 730-744, 1965. 

 Pollack, J. B., and Sag an, C. Polarization of thermal emission from 



Venus. Astrophys. Journ., vol. 141, pp. 1161-1183, 1965. 

 . The microwave phase effect of Venus. Icarus, vol. 4, pp. 



62-103, 1965. 

 . See also Sagan and Pollack. 



Rosenthal, S. See Hawkins, Southworth, and Rosenthal. 



Rybicki, G. Transfer of radiation in stochastic media. Dissertation, 

 Harvard University, 1965. 



Sagan, C. The atmosphere of Venus. In P. J. Brancazio and A. G. W. 

 Cameron, eds., The Origin and Evolution of Atmospheres and 

 Oceans, J. Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, pp. 279-288, 1964. 



. Primordial ultraviolet synthesis of nucleoside phosphates. 



/n S. W. Fox, ed., The Origins of Prebiological Systems, The Aca- 

 demic Press, New York, pp. 207-219, 1965. 



. Is the early evolution of life related to the development of the 



earth's core? Nature, vol. 206, p. 448, 1965. 

 Sagan, C., and Coleman, S. Spacecraft sterilization standards and 



contamination of Mars. Astron. Aeronaut., vol. 3, pp. 22-27, 1965. 

 Sagan, C; Hanst, P. L.; and Young, A. T. Nitrogen oxides on 



Mars. Planet. Space Sci., vol. 13, pp. 73-88, 1965. 

 Sagan, C; Phaneuf, J. P,; and Ihnat, M. Total reflection spectro- 

 photometry and thermogravimetric analysis of simulated Martian 



surface materials. Icarus, vol. 4, pp. 43-61, 1965. 

 Sagan, C, and Pollack, J. B. Spacecraft observations of Venus. 



Ann. d'Astrophys., vol. 28, pp. 229-233, 1965. 

 Sagan, C, and Swan, P. R. Martian landing sites for the Voyager 



mission. Journ. Spacecraft and Rockets, vol. 2, pp. 18-24, 1965. 



. See also Pollack and Sagan. 



Schaeffer, O. A.; Stoenner, R. W.; and Fireman, E. L. Rare gas 



isotope contents and K-Ar ages of mineral concentrates from the 



Indarch meteorite. Journ. Geophys. Res., vol. 70, pp. 209-213, 



1965. 

 Slowey, J. i&tfjacchia and Slowey. 

 Southworth, R. B. The size distribution of the zodiacal particles. 



Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 119, pp. 54-67, 1964. 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 237 



. See also Elford, Hawkins, and Southworth; Hawkins, Lind- 



blad, and Southworth; Hawkins, Southworth, and Rosenthal; 



Hawkins, Southworth, and Verniani. 

 Strom, S. E., and Avrett, E. H. Detailed examination of a non-grey 



stellar atmosphere (abstract). Astron. Journ., vol. 69, p. 559, 1964. 

 . The temperature structure of early-type model stellar 



atmospheres. I. Details of a representative model. Astrophys. 



Journ., vol. 140, pp. 1381-1390, 1964. 

 Strom, S. E.; Gingerich, O.; and Strom, K. M. Metal abundance 



determinations for Vega and Sirius (abstract). Astrophys. Journ., 



vol. 70, p. 148, 1965. 

 . See also Avrett and Strom; Gingerich, Mihalas, Matsushima, 



and Strom. 

 Tilles, D. Atmospheric noble gases: solar wind bombardment of 



extraterrestrial dust as a source mechanism. Science, vol. 148, pp. 



1085-1088, 1965 

 . Anomalous argon isotope ratios in particles from Greenland 



ice and Pacific Ocean sediments (abstract). Trans. Amer. Geophys. 



Union, vol. 46, p. 117, 1965. 

 Tsuruta, S. Neutron star models. Dissertation, Columbia University. 



New York, 1964. 

 Tsuruta, S.; Wright, J. P.; and Cameron, A. G. W. Oscillation 



periods of neutron stars. Nature, vol. 206, pp. 1137-1138, 1965. 

 Veis, G. On the optimum use of satellites for geodesy. COSPAR 



Information Bulletin No. 20, November 1 964; also in Bull. Geodesique, 



No. 74, pp. 283-290, December 1964. 

 . Establishment of a European satellite tracking network. 



Presented at the Symposium on the Smithsonian Astrophysical 



Observatory Tracking Network, Paris, December 1964. 



Le reseau de tracking de l'observatoire de Smithsonian et 



les resultats geodesiques. Presented at a colloquium following the 

 Symposium on the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory Tracking 

 Network, Paris, December 1964. 



The deflection of the vertical of major geodetic datums and 



the semimajor axis of the earth's ellipsoid as obtained from satellite 

 observations. In Space Research V, P. Muller, ed., North-Holland 

 Publ., Amsterdam, pp. 849-875, 1965. 



See also Aardoom, Girnius, and Veis; Whipple and Veis. 



Verniani, F. On the density of meteoroids. II: The density of faint 

 photographic meteors. II Nuovo Cimento, vol. 33, pp. 1173-1184, 

 1964. 



. Densita e struttura delle meteore. Ric. Sci., vol. 34, pp. 



5-12, 1964. 




238 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Verniani, F. On the luminous and ionizing efficiencies of meteors 



(abstract). Astron. Journ., vol. 69, p. 561, 1964. 

 . Aspetti attuali della fisica e dell' astro nomia delle meteore. 



Ric. Sci., vol. 45, pp. 377-415, 1964. 

 . On the luminous efficiency of meteors. Smithsonian Contr. 



Astropyhs., vol. 8, pp. 141-172, 1965. 

 Verniani, F., and Hawkins, G. S. Masses, magnitudes and densities 



of 320 radiometeors. Harvard Radio Meteor Project Research 



Report No. 12, March 1965. 

 . See also Hawkins and Verniani; Hawkins, Southworth, and 



Verniani. 

 Whipple, F. L. The history of the solar system. Proc. Nat. Acad. 



Sci., vol. 52, pp. 565-594, 1964. 

 . Evidence for a comet belt beyond Neptune (abstract). 



Astron. Journ., vol. 69, p. 563, 1964. 



Astronomy from the space stations and meteor problems 



and photographs of the Perseids. In T. Page and L. W. Page, eds., 

 Wanderers in the Sky, Macmillan Co., New York, pp. 119-121, 1965. 

 . Meteor problems and photographs of the Perseids. In T. 



Page and L. W. Page, eds., Wanderers in the Sky, Macmillan Co., 



New YorK, pp. 203-206, 1965. 

 Whipple, F. L., and Veis, G. Erdvermessung mit Satelliten. Bild der 



Wissenschaft, No. 5, pp. 397-404, 1965. 

 Whitney, G. A. Gas dynamics of stellar atmospheres. Presented at 



the Workshop on the Interdisciplinary Aspects of Radiative Trans- 

 fer, J.I.L.A., Boulder, Colo., Feb. 11, 12, 1965. 

 Wright, F. W.; Hodge, P. W.; and Franklin, F. A. The differences 



between meteoritic and volcanic spherules. Presented at the Amer. 



Astron. Soc. Meeting, University of Kentucky, March 16, 1965. 



. See also Hodge, Wright, and Langway. 



Wright, J. P. General relativistic instability . Phys. Rev., vol. 136, 



pp. 288-289, 1964. 

 . Solution of Einstein's field equations for a rotating, stationary 



and dust-filled universe. J. Math. Phys., vol. 6, pp. 103-105, 1965. 

 . See also Tsuruta, Wright, and Cameron. 



The Special Reports of the Astrophysical Observatory distribute 

 catalogs of satellite observations, orbital data, and preliminary results 

 of data analysis prior to journal publication. Numbers 1 57 through 1 80, 

 issued during the year, contain the following material: 



No. 157, July 1, 1964 

 Atmospheric densities and temperatures from the drag analysis of the 

 Explorer 17 satellite, by J. Slowey. 




ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 239 



No. 158, July 10, 1964 

 Satellite orbital data: Satellites 1959 <x\ {Vanguard 2), 1959 rj (Van- 

 guard 3), 1960 a (Echo 1 rocket), and 1961 61 (Explorer 9), for July 

 1-Dec. 31, 1962; Satellites 1961 ol (Transit 4A) and 1961 o2 

 (Injun 3) for July 19-Dec. 31, 1962; Satellite 1961 a51 (Midas 4) for 

 Mar. 13-Dec. 31, 1962; and Satellite 1962 ae\ (Tehtar 7) for July 

 17-Dec. 31, 1962, prepared by I. Izsak. 

 No. 159, July 17, 1964 

 Satellite orbital data: Satellites 1958 a (Explorer 7), 1959 a\ (Vanguard 

 2), and 1959 rj (Vanguard 3) for Apr. 1-July 1, 1963; Satellite 1959 

 tl (Explorer 7) for Apr. 1-Sept. 2, 1963; Satellite 1960 il (Echo 7), 

 1960 £1 (Explorer 8), and 1961 51 (Explorer 9) for Apr. 1-July 1, 1963, 

 prepared by I. Izsak. 

 No. 160, July 27, 1964 

 Satellite orbital data: Satellites 1958 a (Explorer 7), 1959 a\ (Vanguard 

 2), 1959 7? (Vanguard 3), 1960 £1 (Explorer 8), 1961 51 (Explorer 9), 

 1962 ael (Tehtar 7), 1962 /3jul (Anna IB), 1962 ,8x2 (Injun 3), and 

 1962 0el (Relay 7) for July 1-Oct. 1, 1963; Satellite 1960 il (Echo 7) 

 for July 1-Sept. 30, 1963; Satellite 1963 9A (Explorer 77) for Apr. 

 3-Oct. 15, 1963; Satellite 1963 13A (Tehtar 2) for May 7-Oct. 1, 

 1963; and Satellite 1963 26 A (Geophysics Research) for July 9-Oct. 1, 

 1963, prepared by B. Miller. 

 No. 161, August 3, 1964 



Differential orbit improvement (D0I-3), by E. M. Gaposchkin. 

 No. 162, August 14, 1964 



Measures of the earthshine, by G. Bakos. 

 No. 163, September 11, 1964 

 Coated metallic grains as a source of interstellar absorption lines, by 

 C. A. Whitney. 

 No. 164, October 1965 



Analytical development of the planetary disturbing function on a 

 digital computer, by I. G. Izsak, B. Benima, and S. B. Mills. 

 No. 165, November 2, 1964 



New determination of zonal harmonics coefficients of the earth's 

 gravitational potential, by Y. Kozai. 

 No. 166, November 30, 1964 



Thermal effect on the rotational period of an artificial satellite, 

 by G. Colombo and P. Higbie. 

 No. 167, December 21, 1964 



Proceedings first Harvard-Smithsonian conference on stellar atmos- 

 pheres. 

 No. 168, March 19, 1965 



Catalog of precisely reduced observations: Satellite 1962 /3jul 




240 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



(Anna 1B passive) for Nov. 1, 1962-Aug. 31, 1963; Satellite 1962 

 /3/zl (Anna IB flash) for Nov. 1, 1962,— Apr. 30, 1963, and for 

 Aug. 1-31, 1963, prepared by P. Stern and J. MacDonald. 

 No. 169, March 24, 1965 



Satellite orbital data: Satellites 1958 a (Explorer 7), 1959 al 

 (Vanguard 2) 1959 i\ (Vanguard 3), 1960 il (Echo 7), 1960 fl 

 (Explorer 8), 1961 51 (Explorer 9), 1962 at\ (Telstar 7), 1962 /fyl 

 (Anna 1B), 1962 0x2 (Injun 3), 1962 j8ul (/fe/aj> 7), 1963 13A 

 (Telstar 2), and 1963 26A (Geophysical Research) for Oct. 1— Dec. 31, 

 1963; and Satellite 1963 30D for Oct. 30-Dec. 31, 1963. 

 No. 170, December 30, 1964 



Static diffusion models of the upper atmosphere with empirical 

 temperature profiles, by L. G. Jacchia. 

 No. 171, March 26, 1965 



Densities and temperatures from the atmospheric drag on six 

 artificial satellites, by L.G. Jacchia and J. Slowey. 

 No. 172, April 28, 1965 



The volcanic dust sampling program of the Smithsonian Astro- 

 physical Observing Stations, by F. W. Wright and P.W. Hodge; 

 based on field reports by A. Oakes, R. La Count, and S. Tishler. 

 No. 173, May 24, 1965 



The Prairie Meteorite Network, by R. E. McCrosky and H. Boe- 

 schenstein, Jr. 

 No. 174, May 17, 1965 



Proceedings of the second Harvard-Smithsonian conference on 

 stellar atmospheres. 

 No. 175, April 23, 1965 



An analysis of the atmospheric trajectories of 413 precisely reduced 

 photographic meteors, by L. G. Jacchia, F. Verniani, and R. E. 

 Briggs. 

 No. 176, May 17, 1965 



Some results at Smithsonian Observing Stations, by P. Brand, L. 

 Solomon, J. Mazzotta, R. Proctor, J. Latimer, and E. Monash. 

 No. 177, May 3, 1965 



Catalog of satellite observations: Satellites 1958 a\ (Explorer 7), 

 1959 al (Vanguard II), 1959 7,1 (Vanguard III), 1960 il (Echo T), 

 and 1960 i2 (Echo I rocket) for July 1 — Dec. 31, 1963, prepared 

 by B. Miller. 

 No. 178, May 5, 1965 



Catalog of satellite observations: Satellites 1960 fl (Explorer VIII), 

 1961 51 (Explorer IX), 1961 ol (Transit 4A), 1961 o2 (Injun Solar 

 Radiation 3), and 1962 ael (Telstar 1), for July 1-Dec. 31, 1963; 

 Satellite 1962 tl (Cosmos 3) for Aug. 15-18, 1963; Satellite 1962 




ASTROPHYSIGAL OBSERVATORY 241 



ol (S51/UKI) for Dec. 1-5, 1963; Satellite 1962 a|"l (Cosmos 8) 

 for Aug. 3-16, 1963; and Satellite 1962 /3al (Alouette) for Oct. 

 15-31, 1964, prepared by B. Miller. 



No. 179, May 7, 1965 



Catalog of satellite observations: Satellites 1962 /3/il (Anna IB), 

 1962 /3t (Injun 3); 1962 /3ul (Relay 7), and Satellite 1963 13A 

 (Telstar 2) for July 1-Dec. 31, 1963; Satellite 1963 9A (Explorer 

 XVII) for July 1-Nov. 6, 1963; Satellite 1963 10A (Cosmos 14) 

 for July 31-Aug. 30, 1963; Satellite 1963 26A (Geophysics Research) 

 for June 29-Dec. 31, 1963; and Satellite 1963 30D for Oct. 30- 

 Dec. 31, 1963. 



No. 180, June 4, 1965 



Transfer of radiation in stochastic media, by G. B. Rybicki. 



789-427—66—27 





National Collection of Fine Arts 





National Collection of Fine Arts 

 David W. Scott, Director 



The past year was one of dramatic developments for the National 

 Collection of Fine Arts. The physical aspect of the Collection has 

 changed in many ways, and its nature and plans have been no less 

 affected. 



Physically, the Collection is administered from a new group of 

 offices; it boasts a remodeled library and art hall; it is developing a 

 large staging area on 24th Street, and it is engaged in very active 

 planning in connection with the current remodeling of the Old Patent 

 Office Building. Its planning during the past year extended even 

 further, to include considerations for the development of display areas 

 on the Mall, in the old Court of Claims Building, and in the John F. 

 Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. 



The staff nearly tripled in size within the year. Beginning with 8 

 regular employees in July 1964, it had doubled by January and reached 

 22 by the end of June. The administrative side was greatly strength- 

 ened by the establishment of two administrative officers and corre- 

 sponding supporting staff. On the professional and curatorial side, 

 a department of exhibits and a department of painting and sculpture 

 were established. 



A central concern of the staff has been the care and development of 

 the collections. The preliminary catalog listings have been completed 

 through the categories of painting, scultpure, drawings, and prints. 

 The Gellatly Collection was removed from the art hall so that ex- 

 tensive conservation could be undertaken. An increasing number of 

 donations of works of art has augmented the study, loan, and perma- 

 nent collections. The purchase of a John Marin watercolor inaugu- 

 rated a modest but vitally important program for rounding out the 

 survey of American art. 



The wide expansion of the Collection's activities had been inspired 

 and guided by the far-sighted legislation of May 17, 1938, and the 

 competition program which followed that legislative encouragement 

 for a gallery of modern and American art. The plans formulated 

 during the past year were based on such directives as those instructing 

 the bureau "to encourage the development of contemporary art and to 

 effect the widest distribution and cultivation in the matters of such 



245 




246 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



art" and "to consider its province to be the cultural life of the com- 

 munity all over the United States and ... its obligation to be the 

 encouragement of a high standard of quality among artists in the 

 fields of both the fine and practical arts." 



Bearing in mind these goals and others, including the Smithsonian's 

 traditional role in research and the Collection's function as a repository 

 for Government art, the director has developed policy guidelines in 

 such studies as "The Mission and Projects of the National Collection 

 of Fine Arts." Specific plans and projects have followed: community 

 and educational exhibit proposals (including artmobiles) ; maintenance 

 of Government-owned art (for instance Works Progress Administration 

 [WPA] paintings) ; cooperative ventures with the Area Redevelopment 

 Administration, the Office of Education, the Art-in-Embassies program, 

 and the White House (Arts Festival) ; and a number of others. Gradu- 

 ate programs and research facilities are being developed. 



A number of these projects are already bearing fruit. Probably the 

 Collection's outstanding achievement of the year in support of American 

 art was the organization and presentation of the Stuart Davis Memorial 

 Exhibition, together with a catalog. This extensive exhibit (opened by 

 Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson) was most effectively presented in the re- 

 modeled Art Hall. It may be said to reflect the high standards of 

 presentation and scholarship of the NCFA and also the determination 

 of the National Collection to present the great achievements of American 

 art to the nation and the world. 



SMITHSONIAN ART COMMISSION 



The 42d annual meeting of the Smithsonian Art Commission was held 

 in Washington on Tuesday, December 1, 1964. Members present 

 were Paul Manship, chairman; S. Dillon Ripley, secretary; Gilmore D. 

 Clarke, Page Cross, David E. Finley, Lloyd Goodrich, Walker Hancock, 

 Bartlett H. Hayes, Wilmarth S. Lewis, Henry P. Mcllhenny, Ogden M. 

 Pleissner, Edgar P. Richardson, Charles H. Sawyer, and Stow Wengen- 

 roth. Also present were James Bradley, Assistant Secretary of the 

 Smithsonian Institution; David W. Scott, director of the National Col- 

 lection of Fine Arts; Donald McClelland, acting assistant to the director; 

 Richard P. Wunder, curator of paintings and sculpture; and Harry 

 Lowe, curator of exhibits. 



Recommendations were made for the reappointment of Edgar P. 

 Richardson, Charles Sawyer, and David E. Finley for the usual 4-year 

 period. Dr. Richardson was elected chairman of the Commission 

 replacing Paul Manship, who had served as chairman for many years 

 and who had requested that he not be reelected. 




A view of the Stuart Davis Memorial Exhibition as it was shown in the National 

 Collection of Fine Arts' Art Hall. The exhibition, organized by NCFA, 

 was shown in the Art Hall from May 28 through July 5, 1965, before going 

 on for exhibition at the Art Institute of Chicago, the Whitney Museum of 

 American Art in New York City, and the Art Galleries of the University of 

 California at Los Angeles. There were 127 works by Stuart Davis in the 

 exhibition; the one prominently shown in this photograph is a mural, titled 

 Allee, lent to the show by Drake University of Des Moines, Iowa. 




John Marin's The Sea, Maine, 1921, a watercolor and charcoal, 163^ X 19^ 

 inches. A new acquisition of the National Collection of Fine Arts. 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 247 



The following officers were elected for the ensuing year: Edgar P. 

 Richardson, chairman; Gilmore D. Clarke, vice chairman; and S. 

 Dillon Ripley, secretary. 



The following were elected members of the Executive Committee for 

 the ensuing year: David E. Finley, chairman; Gilmore D. Clarke, 

 Ogden M. Pleissner, and Henry P. Mcllhenny, with Edgar P. Richard- 

 son and S. Dillon Ripley, ex officio. 



Mr. Ripley commented on the National Collection of Fine Arts and 

 the appointment of Dr. Scott as the Collection's new director. He said 

 that the current atmosphere in Washington appears to be suitable for 

 the enhancement of the National Collection and that we can look for- 

 ward with hope and great enthusiasm. 



Mr. Bradley remarked on current status of plans on remodeling of 

 the Old Patent Office Building. He said that construction had already 

 begun and that completion was expected in about 22 months' time. 



Events of the past year and for the future were briefly outlined by 

 Dr. Scott and commented upon by members of the Commission. 



The Commission discussed the need to stimulate gifts and donations 

 to the Collection. 



The Commission then reviewed works of art presented for their study 

 and recommended the acceptance or rejection of these works as a part 

 of the Collection. 



ACCESSIONS 



The Collection was increased by 1,243 new acquisitions from 27 

 donors during the year. These include 209 paintings and drawings, 

 7 pieces of sculpture, 1,025 graphics, and 2 decorative art objects. 

 Significant among these accessions are a pair of portraits attributed to 

 Jacob Eicholtz (1776-1842), Jane Evans Tevis and Joshua Tevis, given 

 by the Misses Emily and Nanny Chase; two early 19th-century 

 portraits of Margaret Schley Goldsborough and Edward Terbury Goldsborough 

 by an undetermined artist, given by Miss Mary L. Schaff; a painting, 

 Farmyard in the Snow, by the Ash-Can School painter James Preston 

 (1873-1962), given by Mrs. Chester Browne; two murals by Ezra 

 Winter (1886-1949), the gift of Mrs. Winter; representative examples 

 of the work of Frank C. Kirk (1889-1963), given by Mrs. Kirk; a 

 mural by Griffith Baily Coale (1890-1950), given by the United 

 States [Line; two other works by Coale, gifts of the artist's widow; 

 a study of an unexecuted equestrian monument, Work Horse, given by 

 the artist Anna Hyatt Huntington (born in 1876); a large abstract 

 painting by Charles Green Shaw (born 1892), given by the artist; 

 1,000 19th-century engravings, the gift of Joseph V. Reed; and a 




248 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



watercolor, The Sea, Maine, 1921, by John Marin (1870-1953), acquired 

 by purchase. 



The U.S. Department of Labor transferred 150 paintings executed by 

 various American artists under the auspices of the Works Progress 

 Administration during the 1930's. Included among these are works by 

 Morris Graves (born 1910), Ivan Albright (born 1897), and Jerome 

 Myers (1867-1940). In addition, the department of zoology, Museum 

 of Natural History, transferred two paintings by James Henry Moser 

 (1854-1913), The Still Hunt and Where the Millions Have Gone. 



A group of 20th-century paintings and drawings was made available 

 for the Collection's lending service through the generosity of Olin Dows. 



The Catherine Walden Myer Fund 



The following was purchased from the Myer fund (established to 

 secure first-class works of art for the use and benefit of the NCFA) : 



1964-2-1 watercolor. The Sea, Maine, 1921, 

 by John Marin (1870-1953). 



The Henry Ward Ranger Fund 



According to a provision of the Henry Ward Ranger bequest, 

 paintings purchased by the Council of the National Academy of 

 Design from the fund provided by the bequest and assigned to American 

 art institutions may be claimed during the 5-year period beginning 

 10 years after the death of the artist represented. The following 

 painting was considered for action by the Smithsonian Art Commission 

 at its meeting December 1, 1963: 



No. 64. The Chiefs Canoe, oil by Belmore Browne (1880-1954), 

 was accepted to become a permanent accession. 



Alice Pike Barney Memorial Fund 



Additions to the principal during the year amounting to $2, 305. 10 

 increased the total invested sums in the Alice Pike Barney Memorial 

 Fund to $47,014.08. 



The Alice Pike Barney Memorial Lending Collection 



Forty-three works of art were loaned through the year, and 23 

 works were returned. 



Fifty-six paintings were examined, and priorities were established 

 for the restoration of paintings and frames. Seven works are now in the 

 process of restoration. 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 249 



Harold Colborn of Washington, D.C., donated to the collection 

 Madame R. by Alice Pike Barney. 



THE COLLECTION 



Loans to Other Institutions 



Amon Carter Museum of Western Art, Fort Worth, Tex. 1 



Archives of American Art, Detroit, Mich. 2 



Arts Council of Great Britain, London, England 1 



Direzione Belle Arti, Venice, Italy 1 



Gallery of Modern Art, New York, N.Y. 1 



Los Angeles County Fair Association, Pomona, Calif. 1 



Marycrest College, Rock Island, 111. 1 



Museum of Fine Arts, St. Petersburg, Fla. 1 



Newark Museum, Newark, N.J. 1 



Stadtisches Museum Haus Koekkoek, Kleve, Western Germany 1 



University of California Art Gallery, Santa Barbara, Calif. 1 



University Gallery, Gainesville, Fla. 10 



University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa. 1 



University of Wisconsin Art Gallery, Madison, Wis. 2 



Yellowstone County Fine Arts Center, Billings, Mont. 12 



Total 37 



Works of Art on Loan to the Federal Government 



Bureau of Internal Revenue 2 



Bureau of the Budget 8 



Federal Aviation Agency 1 



Interstate Commerce Commission 10 



National Science Foundation 3 



Office of Economic Opportunity 1 



Smithsonian Institution 53 



U.S. Civil Service Commission 5 



U.S. Department of Justice 10 



U.S. Department of Labor 7 



U.S. Department of Treasury 2 



U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia 6 



U.S. Senate 7 



White House 91 



White House (Office of the Vice President) 9 



White House (Office of Special Assistant to the President) 1 1 

 White House: 



(Office of S.R. for Trade Negotiations) 1 



(Plans for Progress) 3 



Total 230 




250 smithsonian year 1965 



Restoration 



During the year 10 paintings were restored by Harold F. Cross, 2 

 by Ben B. Johnson, 1 by H. Stewart Treviranus, and 1 by Janice W. 

 Hines. In addition, Mr. Cross examined paintings in the collections 

 for condition, so as to establish a priority program for restoration 

 preliminary to reinstallation in the Old Patent Office Building. 

 Sixteen paintings by Albert Pinkham Ryder were examined by Sheldon 

 Keck in anticipation of a special restoration project on these works. 



SPECIAL EXHIBITIONS 



The following chronological summary of the past year's special 

 exhibitions reflects the NCFA's new awareness of its responsibility 

 and potential as the Federal Government's primary agent for the 

 recognition and encouragement of the Nation's artists. 



July 24-August 13, 1964. Fourth All- Army Art Exhibition 



The 20 final prize-winning works — 4 each in the categories of oil, 

 watercolor, printmaking, drawing, and mixed media — selected 

 after a series of competitive exhibitions held at Army installations 

 around the world, comprised the exhibition. 



July 25- August 13, 1964. Potomac Appalachian Trail Club 



The Club's exhibition followed the Trail — through photo- 

 graphs — its whole length, showing the opportunities for enjoyment 

 and study of nature. A full program of talks, demonstrations, and 

 slide showings was presented in the Natural History Building's 

 auditorium throughout the period of exhibition. 



August 22-September 10, 1964. Sixth Bdsnnial Creative Crafts 

 Exhibition 

 The Creative Crafts Council of Washington, representing seven 

 local craftsmen's associations, sponsored this exhibition of a wide 

 variety of craftwork by their members. Among other crafts the 

 show included original designs in ceramics, textiles, metalwork, 

 and weaving. 



September 20-October 8, 1964. Ancient Rock Paintings and 

 Engravings 

 The exhibition contained 26 panels composed of photographs, 

 casts, original surface prints, and drawings which surveyed pre- 

 historic painting and carving in areas all over the world. The 

 emphasis of the selection was on recent discoveries in the Great 

 Lakes region of the United States. Circulated by the Smith- 

 sonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service. 




national collection of fine arts 251 



September 20-October 8, 1964. The Capital Area Art Exhibi- 

 tion Sponsored by the Landscape Club of Washington, D.C. 

 A wide variety of representational subject matter was included in 

 the 1 22 paintings, graphics, and sculptures selected for the show by 

 the Club's jury. 



October 17-November 5, 1964. 71st Annual Exhibition, Society 

 of Washington Artists 

 Ninety-seven paintings and sculptures by artists from the Washing- 

 ton area were selected by the Society. 



October 17-November 5, 1964. Wildlife Paintings of Basil Ede 

 Fifty-one watercolor paintings of birds by the contemporary 

 British artist Basil Ede comprised the exhibition. The showing was 

 jointly sponsored by the British Embassy, the English Speaking 

 Union, and the Audubon Society of the Central Atlantic States. 



November 14-December 3, 1964. Watercolors by "Pop" Hart 

 The exhibition contained 30 observations in watercolor of the life 

 and peoples of North Africa, the West Indies, Mexico, and the 

 South Seas by the colorful American artist George Overbury Hart. 

 Circulated by the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition 

 Service. 



November 14-December 13, 1964. One Hundred Books from 

 Finland 

 The exhibition, organized by the Finnish Publishers' Association, 

 displayed a large selection of recent volumes from several popular 

 presses of Finland. NCFA's presentation added several antique 

 books, fabrics, and artifacts from Finland. 



December 13, 1964-January 3, 1965. 27th Annual American Art 

 League 

 The American Art League's annual exhibition included 126 

 paintings, graphics, and sculptures by area artists. 



December 15, 1964-January 5, 1965. Vases from the Etruscan 

 Cemetery at Cerveteri 

 Fifty antique ceramics, primarily dating from the 6th and 5th 

 centuries, B.C., comprised the exhibition. The material was lent 

 from an Italian collection. Circulated by the American Federation 

 of Arts. 



January 9-28, 1965. Operation Palette II — The Navy Today 

 The exhibition, sponsored by the Department of the Navy, was 

 drawn from its large collection of paintings and drawings commis- 

 sioned as a record of the Navy's activities and personnel. One 

 hundred and twenty works were shown. 



February 9-22, 1965. Swedish Folk Art 



Nearly 400 objects, mostly of 18th- and 19th-century date, were 




252 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



selected for exhibition by the Nordiska Museet of Stockholm. 

 Kitchen implements and farm tools, as well as major pieces of 

 furniture and objects connected with ceremonial events such as 

 weddings, displayed a deep-rooted concern for the quality of every- 

 day surroundings and a refinement of design that is characteristic 

 of the Scandinavian manufacture. Circulated by the Smithsonian 

 Institution Traveling Exhibition Service. 



February 28-March 21, 1965. The Dead Sea Scrolls of Jordan 

 Fourteen scrolls and scroll fragments were the main feature of the 

 exhibit, but it included objects excavated from the religious com- 

 munity which produced and preserved them. Explanatory maps, 

 photographs, and charts coordinated the archeological treasures 

 into a unified presentation of the story of the scrolls' discovery, 

 the people and culture which produced them, and their contempo- 

 rary importance to researchers in history, theology, and archeology. 

 Circulated by the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition 

 Service. 



March 8-April 5, 1965. Danish Abstract Art 



This selection of work, ranging in date from 1938 through 1964 by 

 10 of Denmark's pioneering painters and sculptors, presented an 

 ample experience of the development of contemporary abstract 

 artistic expression in Denmark. Circulated by the Smithsonian 

 Institution Traveling Exhibition Service. 



April 28-May 16, 1965. Meddsval Frescoes from Yugoslavia 

 This exhibition of approximately 90 full-sized facsimiles of frescoes 

 from Yugoslavian churches offered a rare opportunity to view 

 monumental, Byzantine-style painting of the 11th through 14th 

 centuries. The copies of the originals were made under the super- 

 vision of the Gallery of Frescoes in Belgrade, which organized 

 the exhibition, and were of very fine quality. For NCFA the 

 presentation of this exhibition had an added significance — it 

 inaugurated the remodeled Art Hall. By combining the Foyer 

 Gallery and Art Hall display areas, the NCFA was able to present 

 the largest display of the murals in the United States. The 

 NCFA and Yugoslav Embassy cooperated in playing host to the 

 Dumbarton Oaks Byzantine Symposium in connection with this 

 exhibition. Circulated by the Smithsonian Institution Traveling 

 Exhibition Service. 



May 28-July 5, 1965. Stuart Davis Memorial Exhibition 



The Stuart Davis Memorial Exhibition was certainly one of the 

 the most important exhibitions in NCFA's history. The show was 

 intended as a memorial tribute to one of the commanding figures 

 in 20th-century American painting. This evaluation of the status 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 253 



of Stuart Davis could be defined by bringing together representative 

 works from the whole range of his artistic lifetime as well as con- 

 centrating on presentation of paintings of outstanding excellence. 

 One hundred and twenty-seven of Davis's works — from an early 

 watercolor portrait of 1911 to several canvases left unfinished at 

 his death in 1964 — were lent at NCFA's request from 50 private 

 and museum collections. 



NGFA coordinated the exhibition's tour to the Art Institute of 

 Chicago, the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York, 

 and the Art Galleries of the University of California at Los Angeles. 

 The exhibit was opened by Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, and dis- 

 tinguished guests included Mrs. Stuart Davis, her son Earl, and 

 Mrs. Edith Halpert. 



June 5-17, 1965. "Draw, Cut, Scratch, Etch — Print!" 



Fifty prints by American artists, in all major graphic media and 

 dating from the early 19th century to the present, made up this 

 exhibition, circulated by International Business Machines. 



June 5-27, 1965. Mother and Child in Modern Art 



The exhibition was made up of 20 paintings, 20 prints and draw- 

 ings, and 7 sculptures, all related to the theme of maternity. 

 Display of the works of 47 artists produced a great range of style 

 and points of view. Circulated by the American Federation of 

 Arts. 



SPECIAL PROJECTS 

 White House Changing Exhibitions 



The first in a series of exhibitions of modern American painting and 

 prints has been hung in the Executive Wing of the White House under 

 the supervision of the director and with the assistance of Adelyn 

 Breeskin and Donald McClelland. The rotating exhibition presently 

 consists of 38 paintings and 53 prints by outstanding American artists 

 of the 20th century and has been made possible by loans from a number 

 of museums, collectors, and galleries. 



White House Festival of the Arts 



The director and Mrs. Breeskin served as art advisers for the first 

 White House Festival of the Arts held on June 14, 1965. The 

 Festival was concerned with both the visual and performing arts and 

 presented the best of our art today. The paintings selected ranged 

 from the realism of Andrew Wyeth to the "op art" of Richard 




254 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Anuszkiewicz. The painting exhibition was designed and installed by 

 Harry Lowe, curator of exhibits. 



Joseph Henry Statue 



In preparation for the Smithson Bicentennial Celebration, Harry 

 Zichterman coordinated the task of cleaning and refinishing the Joseph 

 Henry statue in front of the Smithsonian Building. Before restora- 

 tion was initiated the metal and corrosive deposits of the statue were 

 analyzed by the Conservation Research Laboratory of the Smithsonian 

 Institution. 



Art-In-Embassies Program 



The State Department's Art-in-Embassies program, under the 

 direction of Mrs. Nancy Kefauver, has been assisted by the National 

 Collection of Fine Arts. The program's purpose is to bring American 

 art to our embassies and in turn to improve our cultural image abroad. 

 The National Collection now serves as a repository and clearinghouse 

 for the Project's collection of paintings, prints, sculpture, and other 

 objects prior to sending these works abroad. Dr. Scott also serves as 

 a member of the Executive Committee for this important program. 



Educational Research Project 



The National Collection of Fine Arts, the American Association of 

 Museums, the Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, 

 and the Arts and Humanities Branch of the Office of Education are 

 sponsoring a survey study, conducted by Bartlett Hayes, Jr., director of 

 the Addison Gallery, the purpose of which is to investigate the scope 

 and effectiveness of existing museum programs of educational art 

 exhibits in the United States, in order to determine how these programs 

 may be extended, supplemented, coordinated, and strengthened. 



Area Redevelopment Administration 



The National Collection of Fine Arts entered in a contract with the 

 Area Redevelopment Administration to provide professional evalua- 

 tions of proposals the latter receives in the fields of arts and crafts. 

 This involves determination of quality, acceptability, and the potential 

 of items produced under the proposal to sustain a livelihood for crafts- 

 men and their associates. A study of private and governmental 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 255 



activities in this field is being made under the supervision of the 

 director and staff by Charles Counts (special consultant), who is pri- 

 marily concerned with this project. 



LIBRARY OF THE NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE 

 ARTS AND THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 



Ending a 12-year period when no full-time staff member was assigned 

 to the library, regular operation was resumed in November 1964. 

 The library now serves the National Portrait Gallery as well as the 

 National Collection of Fine Arts. 



Although some new books and journals were acquired during the 

 period mentioned, there were omissions of many important books and 

 exhibition catalogs of the past decade; concentrated ordering of some 

 of the most important of these has been a top priority project. 



The most important aspects of renewed activity during the year were 

 the addition of a second staff member, the library assistant, in January 

 1965, and the move of the library collection to more spacious and 

 attractive temporary quarters in April. The arrival of the library 

 assistant provided the resources needed to give proper attention to the 

 bureau library's own acquisitions and loan records as well as to the 

 physical collection itself, and also enabled the reestablishment of 

 reference service to the Institution's growing staff. 



During the year the library ordered 334 titles and 167 titles were 

 cataloged. The slide collection was augmented by the addition of 181 

 slides, 46 of which were of the work of Albert Pinkham Ryder. 



Notable gifts received by the library during the year were: The 

 Graphic Work of Mary Cassatt; a Catalogue Raisonne, by Adelyn D. 

 Breeskin, New York, 1948, gift of the author; six catalogs of con- 

 temporary art, by Roman Norbert Ketterer, Lugano, Switzerland, 

 gift of the author; Portraits in Delaware, 1700-1850, published by the 

 National Society of Colonial Dames of America, Delaware Chapter, 

 Wilmington, 1951, gift of the Society; and The Arts in Early American 

 History, by Walter Muir Whitehill (bibliography by Wendall and Jane 

 Garrett), Chapel Hill, 1965, gift of the Institute of Early American 

 History and Culture, Williamsburg, Va. 



The library must continue to build its strength as a general art 

 reference collection. The following areas of concentration, however, 

 are to be developed in depth to serve the special interests of the spon- 

 soring bureaus: American painting and sculpture; portraits in all 

 media, especially American portraits; American biography and 

 history; and the 20th-century art of all countries. 




256 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



PUBLICATIONS 



Publications issued by the National Collection of Fine Arts are as 

 follows: 

 Preliminary Catalogue listing of Paintings, Drawings, and Sculpture, 127 pp., 



no. 41449-64. 

 Preliminary Catalogue Listing of Prints, 73 pp., no 44625-64. 

 Stuart Davis, 98 pp., 63 ills. (Smithsonian Publication 4614). 



Four catalogs of the Traveling Exhibition Service were issued: 



Medieval Frescoes from Yugoslavia, 32 pp., 31 ills. (Smithsonian Publi- 

 cation 4594). 



American Primitive Water colors, 10 pp. text, 5 ills. (Smithsonian Publi- 

 cation 4591). 



Sketches by Constable, 32 pp. text, 56 ills. (Smithsonian Publication 4610). 



Traveling Exhibitions 1965-66. 61 pp., 19 ills. (Smithsonian Publi- 

 cation 4609). 



Leaflets were published in connection with the following Traveling 

 Exhibition Service exhibitions: 



Watercolors by Pop Hart (Smithsonian Publication 4607). 

 Brazilian Tapestries (Smithsonian Publication 4592). 

 Old Master Prints. 

 Brass Rubbings from England. 

 Eugene Berman: New Stage Designs. 



Other publications by staff members: 

 Richard P. Wunder, Architectural and Ornament Drawings of the 16th to 

 the Early 19th Centuries in the Collection of the University of Michigan 

 Museum of Art, 106 pp., Ann Arbor, 1965. 



ADDITIONS TO THE STAFF 



During the past year the following were added to the staff: Abigail 

 Booth, museum technician; Adelyn Dohme Breeskin, special consultant; 

 Waunita E. Franz, secretary; Kenneth R. Despertt, aide; James G. 

 Duggin, photographer; Shirley Harren, library assistant, NCFA-NPG; 

 Chris Karras, information specialist; Harry Lowe, curator of exhibits; 

 Edith T. Martin, clerk-typist; Ronald D. Miller, aide; Priscilla B. 

 Porter, museum technician; Jesse R. Price, clerk; Louise W. Robinson, 

 administrative officer; William H. Truettner, assistant curator, painting 

 and sculpture; Bayard Underwood, on contract as architectural con- 

 sultant; William Walker, librarian, NCFA-NPG; Richard P. Wunder, 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 257 



curator, painting and sculpture; Marjorie S. Zapruder, registrar; 

 Harry W. Zichterman, administrative officer. 



STAFF ACTIVITIES 



Members of the staff devoted considerable time to the study of the 

 collections and new accessions. Research projects were carried out 

 in fields represented by the collections. Staff members also served 

 as jurors for a number of art exhibitions both locally and nationally. 

 Advice was given with respect to 51 5 works of art brought to the Collec- 

 tion for expert opinion by the curatorial staff. In addition, several 

 thousand requests for information were received by mail and telephone. 



David W. Scott, director, represented the Smithsonian Institution 

 at the opening of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art; served as 

 juror at the Huntington Gallery of Art (Huntington, W. Va.); served 

 as guest lecturer and critic at Pennsylvania State College; published 

 "A Restoration of the West Portal of Saint Sernin of Toulouse" in the 

 Art Bulletin, Fall, 1964; spoke on "Traveling Exhibitions" for the annual 

 meeting of the Arts Councils of America, held in Washington; served 

 on the Executive Council of the Art for Embassies program of the 

 Department of State. 



Mrs. Adelyn D. Breeskin, special consultant for Fine Arts, was a 

 member of the jury for the Carnegie International Exhibition, Pitts- 

 burgh, Pa.; a member of the Board for the Print Council of America; 

 lectured as an American Specialist throughout the Orient for the 

 Department of State; and lectured at the Newark Museum on "The 

 Rise of Women Artists." 



Donald McClelland, assistant to the director, lectured on Albert 

 Pinkham Ryder at the University of Chicago and at the National 

 Gallery of Art; served as member of the Board for the Mackinac 

 Historical Society; and acted as a consultant for Fine Arts to the 

 National Headquarters of the Episcopal Church. 



Richard P. Wunder, curator of painting and sculpture, served as 

 director of the Drawing Society; was an adviser to the Museum of 

 Early American Folk Art, New York, and the Olana Preservation 

 Committee. 



Harry Lowe, curator of exhibits, represented NCFA and the Ameri- 

 can Association of Museums at the opening of the St. Petersburg, Fla., 

 Museum of Art; lectured at the annual meeting of the Tennessee Asso- 

 ciation of Museums; lectured on "The American Tate" for the 

 Centennial Club of Nashville, Tenn., and on "What Makes the 

 Difference in Art?" for the National Conference of the Society of 

 Technical Writers and Publishers. 



789-427—66 28 




258 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Rowland Lyon, curator of the lending collection and information 

 service, exhibited in two print exhibitions; acted as a consultant to 

 the Society of Washington Artists and the Landscape Club of 

 Washington. 



Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service 



The National Collection of Fine Arts was instructed (PR 95 of the 75th 

 Congress, 1938) to present exhibits throughout the United States in 

 order "to foster ... a growing appreciation of art, both of past and 

 contemporary time." The Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibi- 

 tion Service (SITES), a unit of the National Collection of Fine Arts, 

 serves to implement the legislative mandates given to the National 

 Collection of Fine Arts. SITES circulates exhibitions of cultural and 

 educational value throughout the United States and Canada as a 

 service to museums, galleries, colleges, libraries, and their public. The 

 negotiations, preparations, and organization of these circulated exhibi- 

 tions are undertaken by the Traveling Exhibition Service, a self-sup- 

 porting nonprofit organization financed through its rental fees. 



The year 1964-1965 was one of great changes for the Traveling 

 Exhibition Service. Mrs. Dorothy Van Arsdale assumed the position 

 of chief, Mrs. Nancy Padnos, assistant chief; Miss Barboura Flues 

 became registrar and then exhibits coordinator, and Mrs. Louis Rose 

 became registrar. Additions to the staff during the year are Mrs. 

 Michael Taylor, exhibits coordinator; Mrs. Sarah McGurgan, typist; 

 Herbert Hodge, clerk; Mrs. Sadie Curtin, accounting technician. 



With these changes the staff for the next year includes, besides the 

 chief and assistant chief, four exhibits coordinators, an accounting clerk, 

 a registrar, a typist, and file clerk. As soon as space is found, an 

 administrative secretary will be added, and SITES will be in a much 

 improved position to expand its offerings and service. 



TRAVEL 



In November 1964, Mrs. Van Arsdale visited three museums in San 

 Francisco, one in Portland, Oreg., two in Seattle, one in Denver, one 

 in Omaha, and one in Minneapolis. Mrs. Van Arsdale, Mrs. Padnos, 

 and staff members also visited museums and collections along the eastern 

 seaboard. 



Mrs. Padnos left for Europe the early part of June to visit museums 

 and galleries in England, France, Italy, Switzerland, and Germany. 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 259 



EXHIBITIONS 



The Service has initiated 41 new shows this year and continued 81 

 from previous years. It has negotiated an exhibition of Treasures from 

 Turkey. Among exhibitors are 106 public schools and 57 libraries, 

 community centers, etc. The Service has made a total of about 586 

 bookings this past year and, with a total budget of approximately 

 $200,000, has had an estimated 1,000,000 viewers. 



Exhibits Continued From Prior Years 



1956-57: Japan II by Werner Bischof. 



1957-58: The American City in the 19th Century; Theatrical Posters of the 

 Gay Nineties. 



1958-59: Advertising in 19th Century America; Religious Subjects in Modern 

 Graphic Arts. 



1959-60: Brazilian Printmakers; Images of War; Portraits of Greatness by 

 Yousuf Karsh; Paintings by Young Africans; Japan I by Werner 

 Bischof. 



1960-61 : The America of Currier and Ives; American Art Nouveau Posters; 

 The Spirit of the Japanese Print; Americans — A View from the 

 East; Mies van der Rohe; Irish Architecture of the Georgian Period; 

 Brasilia — A New Capital; Designed for Silver; American Textiles; 

 The Image of Physics; The Beginnings of Flight; Tropical Africa I; 

 Tropical Africa II; Symphony in Color; Paintings and Pastels by 

 Children of Tokyo; Hawaiian Children's Art. 



1961-62: Physics and Painting: UNESCO Watercolor Reproductions; 

 Caribbean Journey; The Swedish Film; The Story of a Winery; 

 Contemporary Italian Drawings; Contemporary Swedish Prints; 

 Japanese Posters; The Face of Viet Nam; Le Corbusier — Chapel 

 at Ronchamp; The Hidden World of Crystals; Children Look at 

 UNESCO; My Friends. 



1962-63: Eskimo Carvings; Holland; The New Generation: John Sloan; 

 American Prints Today — 1962; Contemporary American Drawings 

 I; Eskimo Graphic Art II; Pakistan Stone Rubbings: Contemporary 

 Canadian Architecture; Twelve Churches; Today's American 

 Wallcoverings; Craftsmen of the City; The Tradition of French 

 Fabrics; A Child's World of Nature; West German Students' Art; 

 Historic Annapolis; The Old Navy. 



1963-64: Alvar Aalto; Albers: Interaction of Color; Africa, Antarctica, 

 the Amazon; American Kindergarten Art; Contemporary American 

 Landscape Architecture; Fifty Years of American Prints; Recent 

 American Synagogue Architecture; Birds of Asia; The Bird that 

 Never Was; Prints by Mary Cassatt; Craftsmen of the Eastern 




260 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



States; Finnish Rugs and Tapestries by Oili Maki; Antonio 

 Frasconi 1952-63; Graphics 163; Hearts and Flowers; Indian 

 Miniatures; 7,000 Years of Iranian Art; The Nile; Treasures from 

 the Plantin-Moretus Museum; Religious Themes by Old Masters; 

 Eero Saarinen; Swedish Design Today; Swedish Folk Art; Swiss 

 Posters; Turner Watercolors; Washington — My City. 



Exhibitions Initiated in 1965 



Archeology 



Dead Sea Scrolls Government of Jordan, Smithsonian Insti- 

 tution, Dr. Gus W. Van Beek. 



Paintings and Sculpture 



American Primitive Watercolors . Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Collec- 

 tion, Williamsburg, Va. 



Arte Programmata Olivetti Corporation, New York City. 



Danish Abstract Art Danish Artists' Committee; Danish 



Embassy. 

 Watercolors by Pop Hart . . . Miss Jeanne O. Hart, Kew Gardens, N.Y. 

 Pueblo Indian Paintings .... Riverside Museum, New York City. 

 Modern Watercolors from Swedish Institute, Stockholm; Swedish 



Sweden. Embassy. 



The Art of the Yoruba .... Dr. Lawrence Longo, University of 



Pennsylvania. 

 Medieval Frescoes from Gallery of Frescoes, Belgrade; Embassy of 



Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia. 



Drawings and Prints 



Contemporary American Norfolk Museum of Arts and Sciences, 



Drawings II. Norfolk, Va. 



William Blake; Poet, Printer, William Blake Trust, London; Trianon 



Prophet. Press, Paris. 



Bridges, Tunnels, and Water- Smithsonian Institution, Division of Civil 



works. Engineering, Robert M. Vogel. 



Prints by Jacques Callot .... National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.; 



Lessing J. Rosenwald; Robert L. Baumfeld. 



Sketches by Constable Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 



Graham Reynolds. 

 Contemporary Fine Presses in The Philadelphia College of Art. 



America. 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 261 



Eskimo Graphic Axt III . . . . Eskimo Art, Inc., Ann Arbor, Mich., 



Eugene Power. 

 The Fabulous Decade Free Library of Philadelphia; Miss Dorothy 



Hale Litchfield. 

 Kokoschka: King Lear, Apul- Marlborough Fine Arts, London. 



ian Journey, Hellas. 

 Prints from the Mourlot Press. . Mourlot Imprimeurs, Paris. 

 Old Master Prints National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.; 



Lessing J. Rosenwald. 



Decorative Arts 



American Costumes Index of American Design, National 



Gallery of Art, Washington, D.G. 

 American Furniture Index of American Design, National 



Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. 

 Eugene Berman: New Stage De- Artist; M. Knoedler and Company, New 

 signs. York City. 



Brazilian Tapestries Senor Genaro de Carvalho, Bahia, Brazil. 



Masters of Ballet Design .... Spreckels Collection, California Palace of 



the Legion of Honor, San Francisco, Calif. 

 Murals in Lace Museum of Contemporary Crafts, New 



York City; Collection Mme. Luba Krejci, 



Czechoslovakia. 



History 



The American Flag Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 



Be My Guest ! Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 



Brass Rubbings from England . Mrs. Lewis Purnell, Jamaica, B.W.I. 



World Fairs Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 



Children's Art 



Paintings by Young Balinese . . Collection of Mrs. Gordon Wiles, Encino, 



Calif. 

 Paintings by Mexican Children . The Phoenix Art Museum. 

 National High School Prints . . F. Louis Hoover, Normal State University, 



Normal, 111. 



Natural History and Science 



Ancient Rock Paintings and En- Cranbrook Institute of Science, Cranbrook, 

 gravings. Mich. 




262 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Colors and Patterns in the Animal CIBA Corporation, Basle, Switzerland; 



Kingdom. Prof. Dr. A. Portmann. 



The Eskimo in a Changing Charles Gimpel, Gimpel Fils, London. 



World. 



The Stonecrop Family; Variations San Diego Museum of Natural History, Dr. 



on a Pattern. Reid Moran. 



Photography 



African Folkways of Angola and National Geographic Society; Museum of 



Mozambique. Primitive Art, New York City. 



The Color of Water Jeanette Klute, Photographer; Eastman 



Kodak Company, Rochester, N.Y. 

 The Eloquent Light Mrs. Nancy Newhall, George Eastman 



House, Rochester, N.Y.; Ansel Adams, 



Carmel, Calif. 



Architecture 



Pier Luigi Nervi American Institute of Architects, New 



York City. 




Freer Gallery of Art 





Freer Gallery of Art 

 John A. Pope, Director 



THE COLLECTIONS 



Twenty-five objects were added to the collections by purchase as 

 follows : 



Glass 



65.16. Egyptian (Roman period), possibly from Alexandria. Bowl of 

 purplish translucent matrix; ribbed on the outside with 

 opaque distorted spirals in millefiori technique. Slightly 

 iridescent. Said to have been found in northwest Iran. 

 Height: 0.052; diameter: 0.175. 



Metalwork 



64.10. Persian, Sasanian, 4th century A.D. Bowl, shallow, silver, on 

 low ring foot, with a Bacchanalian triumphal scene in flat 

 relief against a gilded background; in the exergue, a panther 

 drinking from a vase, flanked by a musician on either side. 

 Small areas of dirt accretions in interior; reverse oxidized 

 and partly covered with earthy accretions. Height: 0.041; 

 diameter: 0.219; weight: 1 lb. 14 oz. (Illustrated.) 



Paintings 



64.9. Chinese, Sung, 13th century. "Chien-tzu with a Shrimp Net." 

 Kakemono, ink on paper. Inscription and one seal on the 

 painting. Height: 0.746; width: 0.279. (Illustrated.) 



65.9. Chinese, Sung, 13th century, attributed to Hu Chih-fu. "Saky- 

 amuni Emerging from the Mountains." Hanging scroll, ink 

 on paper. Inscription and two seals on the painting. Height : 

 0.920; width: 0.317. 



265 




266 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



65.10. Chinese, Ch'ing, dated 1759, by Chin Nung (1687-after 1764). 



Plum blossoms. Ink and color on paper. Written label with 

 one seal on outside mounting; inscription and three seals on 

 the painting. Height: 1.302; width: 0.282. 



65.13. Chinese, Ch'ing, 17th century, by Hung-jen. Landscape. 

 Hanging scroll, ink on paper. Artist's inscription and seal, 

 and three collectors' seals, on the painting. Height: 0.838; 

 width: 0.419. 



64.8. Japanese, Edo, Nanga school, by Uragami Gyokudo (1745— 

 1820). "San Chu Dankin." Landscape in ink, on paper. 

 Height: 1.286; width: 0.515. 



64.11. Japanese, Edo, 18th century, Nanga school, by Ikeno Taiga 



(1723-76). Landscape: "Red Cliff." Ink and color on 

 paper. Height: 1.308; width: 0.568. 



64.12. Japanese, Edo, 18th century, Nanga school, by Ikeno Taiga 



(1723-76). Landscape: "Yo-yang Tower." Ink and color 

 on paper. Height: 1.304; width: 0.568. (Illustrated.) 



64.13. Japanese, Namboku Cho — Ashikaga, 14th century, Yamatoe 



school. Portrait of Kasuga Wakamiya. Ink, color and gold 

 on silk. Height: 0.853; width: 0.396. 



65.1. Japanese, Ashikaga, 15th century, Yamatoe school. Portrait 



of Fujiwara-no-Kamatari (A.D. 614-669), accompanied by 

 two sons. Ink, color and gold on silk. Height: 0.845; width: 

 0.381. 



65.5. Japanese, Edo, Kano school, by Kano Naonobu (1607-50). 



"Genji Monogatari" — Tales of Genji, Ukifune, Chapter LI. 

 Ink and color on paper. One of a pair of screens: 65.5-65.6. 

 Height: 1.537; width: 3.526. 



65.6. Japanese, Edo, Kano school, by Kano Naonobu (1607-50). 



"Genji Monogatari" — Tales of Genji, Yugao, Chapter IV. 

 Ink and color on paper. One of a pair of screens: 65.5-65.6. 

 Height: 1.537; width: 3.526. 



Pottery 



65.2. Chinese, Ming, mid-1 5th century. Jardiniere with footed base 



attached, and quatrefoil rim. Clay: fine white porcelain, 

 thick. Glaze: transparent, faintly bluish, streaky in some 

 areas. Decoration: in underglaze blue, a different flower 

 spray on each side (lotus, peony, -?- and camellia) ; small sprays 

 on base and foot. Height: 0.140; width: 0.260. (Illustrated.) 



65.3. Chinese, Six Dynasties. Small dish on high footrim 



with lip cut in quatrefoil form. Clay: transparent, creamy 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 267 



white, fine. Glaze: transparent, glossy, faintly bluish in 

 droplets. Decoration: none. Height: 0.045; diameter: 0.133. 



65.4. Chinese, Ming, Hsiian-te period (1426-35). Dish with 

 slightly flaring plain rim. Clay: fine white porcelain. Glaze: 

 transparent. Decoration: five-clawed dragons among clouds 

 in overglaze iron red inside and out; six-character Hsiian-te 

 mark in under-glaze blue on base. Height: 0.037; diameter: 

 0.190. 



65.8. Chinese, T'ang. Rhyton in the shape of a duck. Clay: soft 

 light buff pottery. Glaze: transparent lead glaze with fine 

 crackle streaked with green and orangey brown; base unglazed. 

 Decoration: carved in relief for the wings and tail feathers of 

 the bird and to show floral motifs around the cup. Height: 

 0.124; length: 0.172. 



65.11- Chinese, T'ang, Hsing ware. Five-lobed shallow bowls with 



65.12. low foot. Clay: hard, fine-grained grayish buff stoneware. 

 Glaze: transparent, showing slightly bluish in thick areas; 

 base only partially glazed by accident. Decoration: a floral 

 device stamped inside center of bowl. Height: 0.045; diam- 

 eter: 0.127; diameter of base: 0.057 (65.11) and 0.054 (65.12). 



65.14. Chinese, T'ang. Ovoid jar with flaring foot and three loop 



handles at the neck. Clay: whitish buff stoneware. Glaze: 

 transparent, slightly creamy stopping unevenly short of base. 

 Decoration: none. Height: 0.165; diameter: 0.133. 



65.15. Chinese, T'ang. Hemispherical bowl with flaring foot and 



thickened, turned-over rim. Clay: whitish buff stoneware. 

 Glaze: transparent, slightly creamy, stopping unevenly short 

 of base; unglazed inside. Decoration: none. Height: 0.092; 

 diameter: 0.159. 



65.7. Japanese, Edo, 17th century, Imari. Shallow dish with plain 

 rim. Clay: white porcelain. Six spur marks on base. 

 Glaze: transparent. Decoration: underglaze blue; a stylized 

 pine tree and clouds. Outside, continuous scroll pattern. 

 Imitation Ming Ch'eng-hua mark badly written on base. 

 Height: 0.060; diameter: 0.298. 



65.17. Japanese, Edo, 17th century, Imari. Shallow dish with 

 rounded rim. Clay: white porcelain. Five spur marks on 

 base. Glaze: transparent, slightly grayish with some black 

 specks. Decoration: underglaze blue, floral border, and in 

 center, stylized pine tree leaning over a small plant. Out- 

 side, two stylized lotus scrolls. Imitation Ming Ch'eng- 

 hua mark badly written on base. Height: 0.070; diameter: 

 0.374. 




268 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



65.18. Japanese, Edo (ca. 1700), Imari. Hexagonal vase or sake 

 bottle with small flaring mouth. Clay: white porcelain. 

 Glaze: dark coffee brown around bottom with white run- 

 ning unevenly down from the top. Decoration: on white 

 glaze at shoulder and upper part, two eagles and branches 

 of trees in colored enamels and gilding. Height: 0.224; 

 diameter: 0.127. 



Wood Sculpture 



65.19. Japanese, Kamakura, late 13th century. Jizo. Decorated 

 with kirigane; head, hands, and necklace separate; ear lobes 

 and some beads missing; partial repair. Height: 0.355; 

 width: 0.120. 



Repairs To The Collection 



Thirteen Chinese and Japanese paintings and screens were restored, 

 repaired, or remounted by Mr. Sugiura, Oriental picture mounter, 

 who also made a large number of rubbings of Chinese bronzes and 

 sculptures. F. A. Haentschke, illustrator, remounted 91 Persian and 

 Indian paintings. Ben Johnson, professional painting restorer, worked 

 for some months at the Gallery, cleaning, repairing, and otherwise 

 restoring 21 American paintings. 



Mr. Sugiura has also been working on a group of 11 Chinese and 

 Japanese paintings and screens belonging to the Philadelphia Museum 

 of Art, 6 of which have been completed; this work is being done in 

 exchange for a Chinese bronze ting which has been incorporated into 

 the Study Collection. In addition, he has completely cleaned, re- 

 paired, and retouched three Far Eastern screens belonging to the 

 Department of State. 



Changes In Exhibition 



Changes in exhibitions amounted to 39, which were as follows: 

 American art — paintings 36 



Chinese art — pottery 1 



Near Eastern art — metalwork 2 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 269 



LIBRARY 



The library has been well used during the year, both by the staff and 

 by students doing reference work. It also remains a continuing 

 source of information for casual visitors wanting less scholarly material 

 on the objects displayed in the galleries. 



The slide collection has been greatly expanded, with the acquisition 

 of over 2,000 slides. Use of this resource has nearly tripled in the 

 past year, as indicated by the number of slides borrowed by both staff 

 members (73 percent) and by outside lecturers (27 percent). Most of 

 the slides were provided by the photographic laboratory. 



During the year, 452 items were acquired by the library and inte- 

 grated into the collection; 257 of these were by purchase, and 195 

 were by exchange and gift. In addition, 286 photographs were added 

 to the study files. The year's cataloging projects totaled over 1,000 

 entries; 488 analytics were made, and 3,022 cards were added to the 

 catalog. 



There were 330 requests for information by telephone and letter. 

 Visitors were frequent: 670 scholars and students who were not 

 members of the Freer staff used the library resources, 4 saw and studied 

 either the Herzfeld archives or the Washington Manuscripts, and 3 

 came to see the library installation. 



The following gifts deserve special mention because of their out- 

 standing quality. The Ellen Bayard Weedon Foundation has made 

 it possible to purchase the following items: Pelliot, Paul — Toumchouq 

 (Paris, 1961-64, two volumes); and Ota Ryo — Seishi kakei dai-jiten: 

 Great dictionary of family names and family lines (Tokyo, 1963 reprint, three 

 volumes). The library is receiving from the Felix and Helen Juda 

 Foundation the volumes from the Hiraki collection of Ukiyoe prints 

 currently being published in Tokyo, as well as a copy of Shin Saiiki-ki: 

 New accounts of Chinese Turkestan — the journal of the Otani expedition 

 (Tokyo, 1937). Richard P. Gale has also presented a set of 125 slides 

 taken from his excellent collection of Japanese paintings. The gener- 

 osity which makes these acquisitions possible is greatly appreicated. 



PUBLICATIONS 



New editions of two publications were issued by the Gallery as 



follows: 



Freer Gallery of Art Occasional Papers, Volume I, Number 4: James 

 McNeill Whistler, A Biographical Outline Illustrated from the 

 Collections of the Freer Gallery of Art, by Burns A. Stubbs (Smith- 

 sonian Institution Publication 3994), originally published in 1950. 




270 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Hokusai: Paintings and Drawings in the Freer Gallery of Art, by Harold P. 

 Stern (Smithsonian Institution Publication 4419), originally 

 published in 1960. 

 Publications of staff members were as follows: 



Cahill, James F. 



Ettinghausen, Richard. 



Gettens, R. J. 



"Li Kung-lin". In: Encyclopedia of World 

 Art. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1964. 

 Vol. 9, pp. 247-251, pis. 132-136. 



Introduction to: Chang Dai-chien; exhibition 

 of paintings Oct. 22-Nov. 2, 1963. New 

 York, Hirschl & Adler Galleries, Inc., 

 1963, 27 pp., illus. 



Review of "Chinese Art: Painting, Callig- 

 raphy, Stone Rubbing, Wood Engrav- 

 ing," by Werner Speiser, Roger Goepper, 

 and Jean Fribourg. In New York Review 

 of Books (June 3, 1965), vol. 4, no. 9, 

 pp. 23-24. 



Review of "A History of Far Eastern Art," 

 by Sherman E. Lee. In Saturday Review 

 (Dec. 12, 1964), vol. 47, no. 50, p. 45, 

 illus. 



Review of "Cairo, City of Art and Com- 

 merce," by Gaston Wiet, translated by 

 Seymour Feiler. In Middle East, Wash- 

 ington, D.C. (spring, 1965), vol. 19, no. 2, 

 p. 243. 



"The Corrosion Products of Metal Antiqui- 

 ties." In Smithsonian Annual Report for 

 1963, Washington, 1964, pp. 547-568, 

 10 plates. 



Review of special issue (vol. 64, no. 1) of 

 Museums Journal. In Studies in Conserva- 

 tion (February 1965), vol. 10, no. 1, 

 pp. 36-37. 



Review of "Orichalcum and Related An- 

 cient Alloys: Origin, Composition and 

 Manufacture with Special Reference to 

 the Coinage of the Roman Empire," by 

 Earle R. Caley. In American Journal of 

 Archaeology (January 1965), vol. 69, No. 1, 

 p. 86. 



Review of "Technical Supplements" in 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 271 



Museum News. In Studies in Conservation 

 (February 1965), vol. 10, No. 1, p. 36. 



Stern, Harold P. Interview: "Nihon Kobijutsu Junkai Ten; 



the Traveling Exhibition of Ancient Japa- 

 nese Art." In Nihon Bijutsu, Tokyo (Jan- 

 uary 1965), No. 34, pp. 70-71, illus. 



Trousdale, William. "The Minaret of Jam; a Ghorid Monument 



in Afghanistan." In Archaeology (June 

 1965), vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 102-108, illus. 



PHOTOGRAPHIC LABORATORY; SALES DESK 



The photographic laboratory made 12,688 items during the year as 

 follows: 7,816 prints, 966 negatives, 3,642 color slides, 171 black-and- 

 white slides, and 93 color sheet films. At the sales desk 71,436 items 

 were sold, comprising 6,004 publications and 65,432 reproductions 

 (including postcards, slides, photographs, reproductions in the round, 

 etc.). These figures indicate a marked increase in the work of both the 

 photographic laboratory and sales desk over that of previous years. 



BUILDING AND GROUNDS 



The exterior of the building appears to be sound, with the exception 

 of the roof, which has continued to blister. There is, however, no 

 noticeable damage to date; the condition is being kept under close 

 surveillance. A new bronze handrail was installed at the south 

 entrance; during installation, the steps were damaged, and two pieces 

 of granite had to be replaced. 



The sidewalk at the south entrance is in poor condition, and its 

 improvement is under discussion; the installation of a driveway to 

 remedy the dangerous condition at the receiving entrance is also under 

 consideration. 



In the interior, new types of cases are being installed in Storage Room 

 2 for folding screens and outsize pictures; the latter in the past had no 

 adequate storage space. All window sills and trims have been touched 

 up and put into good condition. 



The work in the cabinet shop was divided among numerous jobs, 

 including making and repairing furniture and equipment as the need 

 arose. Attribution of man-hours for this year: 80 percent to installation, 

 preservation, and restoration; 20 percent to building maintenance. 



Seasonal plantings in the courtyard were made and have flourished, 

 and flower beds, first of bulbs and then of petunias, were made on the 

 north side of the building. 




272 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



ATTENDANCE 



The Gallery was open to the public from 9:00 to 4:30 every day 

 except Christmas Day. The total number of visitors to come in the 

 main entrance was 211,104, an increase of approximately 25 percent 

 over that of the preceding year. The highest monthly attendance was 

 in June — 31,015. 



There were 2,856 visitors who came to the Gallery office for various 

 purposes — for general information, to submit objects for examination, 

 to consult staff members, to take photographs or sketch in the galleries, 

 to use the library, to examine objects in storage, etc. 



AUDITORIUM 



The series of illustrated lectures was continued as follows: 

 7964 



October 73. Dr. Eleanor Consten von Erdberg, of the Rheinisch- 



Westphalische Technische Hochschule, Aachen, 

 West Germany: "T'ao-t'ieh and Tao in Early 

 Chinese Art"; attendance, 94. 



November 70. Dr. George C. Miles, of the American Numismatic 

 Society, New York: "Unknotting the Knotted 

 Column in Byzantine Architecture"; attendance, 

 125. 

 7965 



January 72. William B. Trousdale, Freer Gallery of Art: "The 



Archaeological Exploration of Afghanistan"; attend- 

 ance> 277. 



February 23. Dr. Sherman E. Lee, of the Cleveland Museum of 



Art, Cleveland, Ohio: "Nuances and Connoisseur- 

 ship in Chinese Painting"; attendance, 274. 



March 23. Dr. David Talbot Rice, University of Edinburgh, 



Scotland: "Two Rare Arabic Manuscripts in the 

 Edinburgh Library"; attendance, 119. 



April 20. P. R. Ramachandra Rao, Critic of Indian Art, 



Hyderabad, India: "The Buddhist Sculpture of 

 Southeast India"; attendance, 222. 

 The auditorium was also used by ten outside organizations for 31 



meetings, with a total attendance of 5,070. 




Silver bowl. Persian metalwork, Sasanian, 4th century A.D. 64.10, 

 Freer Gallery of Art. 



Jardiniere. Chinese pottery, Ming dynasty, mid-1 5th century A.D. 

 65.2, Freer Gallery of Art. 






1 '' II 



4H I 





.«, * i i fR t 



*> ' * ,ti 7 •• 



>- £ # ff ? . 



U *, <8 *> f * 



0^"~ 



i>/i, Landscape: Yo-yang Tower. Japanese painting, Edo period, 18th century 

 A.D., Nanga school, by Ikeno Taiga (1723-1776). 64.12, Freer Gallery of 

 Art. Right, Chinese painting, Chien-tzu with a Shrimp Net. Sung dynasty, 

 13th century A.D. 64.9, Freer Gallery of Art. 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 273 



STAFF ACTIVITIES 



The work of the staff members has been devoted to the study of new 

 accessions, of objects contemplated for purchase, and of objects sub- 

 mitted for examination, as well as to individual research projects in 

 the fields represented by the collection of Chinese, Japanese, Persian, 

 Arabic, and Indian materials. In all, 10,627 objects and 1,499 photo- 

 graphs were examined, and 781 Oriental language inscriptions were 

 translated for outside individuals and institutions. By request, 36 

 groups totaling 798 persons met in the exhibition galleries for docent 

 service by the staff members. Eight groups totaling 144 persons were 

 given docent service by staff members in the storage rooms. 



Among the visitors were 188 distinguished foreign scholars or per- 

 sons holding official positions in their own countries, who came here 

 under the auspices of the Department of State to study museum admin- 

 istration and practices in this country. 



TECHNICAL LABORATORY 



Mrs. Elisabeth W. FitzHugh, assistant in technical research since 

 1956, resigned in December. This position has been temporarily filled 

 by student-intern William T. Chase of the Conservation Center, Insti- 

 tute of Fine Arts, New York University. 



Reports were made on a total of 89 objects that passed through the 

 laboratory. Among these, 30 Freer objects, exclusive of paintings, 

 were examined and/or treated. Twenty-one paintings, mostly by 

 James McNeill Whistler, were cleaned, repaired, and resurfaced. 

 Among these, two were relined and eight were put on new stretchers. 

 Twenty objects and paintings being considered for purchase were 

 examined. Eighteen objects owned privately and by other museums 

 were examined and/or repaired. Thirty-six identifications were made 

 by X-ray diffraction analysis. Forty-one inquiries were answered by 

 letter and numerous inquiries by telephone. 



Technical studies continued on Chinese bronzes in preparation of 

 a forthcoming catalog on Ancient Chinese Bronze Ceremonial Vessels in 

 the Freer Gallery of Art. Further studies were made on the corrosion 

 products of metal antiquities. The editing of IIC Abstracts, published 

 by the International Institute of Conservation of Historic and Artistic 

 Works, London, was continued. 



789-427—66 29 




274 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



LECTURES BY STAFF MEMBERS 



By invitation, the following lectures were given outside the Gallery 



by staff members (illustrated unless otherwise noted) : 

 7964 



August 20. Dr. Ettinghausen, in Denver, Colo., at the Denver Art 



Museum: "7,000 Years of Iranian Art"; attendance, 500. 



October 8. Mr. Gettens, in Spoleto, Italy, at the International 



Symposium on the Problems of Conservation of Bronze 

 and Nonferric Metals: "The Corrosion Products of 

 Copper Alloys and other Non-Ferrous Metal Antiqui- 

 ties"; attendance, 75. 



October 9. Mr. Gettens, in Spoleto: "The Construction of Chinese 



Bronzes"; attendance, 75. 



October 72. Dr. Ettinghausen, at the University of Pennsylvania, 



Philadelphia: "Man and Nature in Islam"; attendance, 

 80. 



October 72. Dr. James Cahill, at a Faculty Seminar, Skidmore College, 



Saratoga Springs, N.Y.: "Confucianism, Taoism and 

 Buddhism in Chinese and Japanese Painting"; at- 

 tendance, 75. 



October 29. Dr. Cahill, at the Hermitage Foundation, Norfolk, Va.: 



"Chinese and Japanese Art in the Freer Gallery"; 

 attendance, 120. 



November 8. Dr. Ettinghausen, at the William Rockhill Nelson Gallery 



of Art, Kansas City, Mo.: "Persian Art of the Islamic 

 Period: Tradition and Change"; attendance, 300. 



November 73. Dr. Cahill, at the University of California, Berkeley: 



"Yuan Chiang and His School"; attendance, 70. 



November 74. Dr. Cahill, at Mills College, Oakland, Calif., and at the 



Society for Asian Art, San Francisco: "The Expressive 

 Means of Later Chinese Painting"; attendance, 85 and 

 40, respectively. 



December 3. Dr. Pope, at a meeting of the Archaeological Institute of 



America at the Freer Gallery of Art: "Early America and 

 the Far East"; attendance, 38. 



December 3. Dr. Cahill, at a meeting of the Sino-America Cultural 



Society, Washington, D.C.: "A Photographic Expedition 

 to Taiwan"; attendance, 200. 



December 70. Dr. Ettinghausen, at the Foreign Service Institute, Wash- 



ington, D.C.: "Culture of the Near East" ; attendance, 17. 

 7965 



January 29. Dr. Ettinghausen, at the University of Chattanooga, 



Chattanooga, Tenn.: "Tradition and Change in Iranian 

 Art of the Islamic Period"; attendance, 200. 



January 30. Dr. Ettinghausen, at the University of Chattanooga: 



"The Main Types of Iranian Architecture, Their Origin 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 



275 



1965 and Most Important Examples", and: "Painting in the 



Islamic World (Arabic, Persian, Turkish, and Indian)"; 

 attendance, 14 at each lecture. 



January 30. Dr. Pope, at the College Art Association meetings, Los 



Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles, Calif.: 

 "Preliminary Observations on the Use of Landscape 

 Decoration on Japanese Porcelain"; attendance, 150. 



January 30. Dr. Stern, at the College Art Association meetings, Los 



Angeles County Museum of Art: "A Self-portrait of 

 Moronobu"; attendance, 150. 



February 1. Dr. Cahill, at the Cosmos Club, Washington, D.C.: 



"Works of Art of the Palace Museum Collection in 

 Formosa"; attendance, 150. 



February 16. Dr. Cahill, at Brown University, Providence, R.I.: "The 



Expressive Means of Later Chinese Painting"; at- 

 tendance, 350. 



February 24. Dr. Ettinghausen, at the Department of State, Washington, 



D.C.: "Iran, Turkey and Pakistan: The Affinity of 

 Their Civilizations"; attendance, 750. 



February 26. Dr. Ettinghausen, at the Cleveland Museum of Art: 



"The Islamic Phase of Iranian Art: Tradition and 

 Change"; attendance, 150. 



February 28. Dr. Stern, at the Minneapolis Institute of Arts; "Popular 



Painting of Tokugawa Japan" ; attendance, 150. 



March 3. Mr. Gettens, at the Museum of Natural History, Smith- 



sonian Institution: "Minerals in Art and Archaeol- 

 ogy"; attendance, 678. 



March 10. Dr. Pope, at Oxford University, England (William Cohn 



Memorial Lecture): "Some Historic Collections and 

 Collectors in China"; attendance, 160. 



March 12. Dr. Pope, at the Percival David Foundation of Chinese 



Art, London, England: "Chinese Porcelain in Early 

 America"; attendance, 125. 



April 2. Dr. Pope, at the Cleveland Museum of Art: "The Rise and 



Fall of Angkor"; attendance, 150. 



April 5. Dr. Ettinghausen, at the Art Museum, University of 



Michigan, Ann Arbor: "Dionysian Elements in Sasanian 

 Art"; attendance, 40. 



Abril 5. Dr. Stern, at Skidmore College, Faculty Seminar on Far 



Eastern Art and Culture: "Japanese Paintings, Prints, 

 and Decorative Arts"; attendance, 25. 



April 6. Dr. Stern, at Skidmore College, student group: "Japanese 



Paintings, Prints, and Decorative Arts"; attendance, 300. 



April 29. Mr. Trousdale, at Maryland Institute, Baltimore: "The 



Archaeological Exploration of Afghanistan"; attendance, 

 150. 




276 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



1965 



May 11. 

 May 22. 



Dr. Ettinghausen, at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston: 

 "Dionysiac Scenes in Sasanian Art"; attendance, 121. 



Dr. Pope, at the Frick Collection, New York: "Chinese 

 Porcelains in Early America"; attendance, 175. 



Members of the 

 ness as follows: 



1964 

 May 18- July 7. 



June 8-September 2. 



July 16-18. 



July 28. 

 August 13-17. 



August 15- 

 December 11 . 



September 17-18. 



October 1-2. 



October 1-23. 



OFFICIAL TRAVEL 



staff traveled outside Washington on official busi- 



Mr. R. C. Mielke completed a trip through the Mid- 

 western States, where he saw the building installations 

 in the Dayton Art Institute, Cincinnati Art Museum, 

 John Herron Art Institute (Indianapolis), City Art 

 Museum of St. Louis, William Rockhill Nelson 

 Gallery of Art (Kansas City, Mo.), Art Institute of 

 Chicago, Detroit Institute of Arts, Toledo Museum of 

 Art, and Cleveland Museum of Art. 



Dr. Pope, in Europe, visited numerous museums and 

 saw private collections in Geneva and Basel, Switzer- 

 land; Paris, France; and in and near London, England. 



Dr. Stern, in Philadelphia, examined numerous objects 

 at the Philadelphia Museum of Art and one private 

 collection. 



Dr. Cahill, in Baltimore, examined numerous Chinese 

 paintings at the Walters Art Gallery. 



Dr. Stern, in New York, attended the Exhibition of 

 Nepalese Art at Asia House, and examined Far 

 Eastern objects at a dealer. 



Mr. Trousdale, in the Near East, participated in the 

 University of Michigan's archeological excavation at 

 Qasr al-Hayr al-Sharqi, Syria; visited archeological 

 sites and architectural monuments, and examined 

 museum and private collections in Istanbul and 

 Ankara, Turkey; in Damascus, Syria; in Tehran, Qum, 

 Isfahan, Arbaquh, Yazd, Kirman, Bam, the Sistan 

 area, Kishmar, Mashhad, and Robat Sharaf, Iran; 

 and in Cairo and Alexandria, Egypt. 



Dr. Cahill, in Ann Arbor, Mich., attended a special 

 committee meeting to plan for the Palace Museum 

 Photographic Archive. 



Dr. Pope, in New York, examined numerous Far 

 Eastern objects at the Metropolitan Museum of Art 

 and at several dealers. 



Mr. Gettens, in Italy, attended an International 

 Symposium on the Problem of Conservation of Bronze 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 



277 



and Nonferric Metals held at Spoleto, October 5-15; 

 examined numerous bronzes and historical sites in 

 Perugia, Venice, Ravenna, Ancona, and Rome, 

 including Vatican City. 



October 16- Dr. Stern, in Japan, attended conferences with the 



December 11. Commission for the Protection of Cultural Properties 



of the Ministry of Education of the Government of 

 Japan as participating member of Negotiations, 

 Selection, and Cataloging Committees of the America- 

 Canada Participating Museums for the Memorial 

 Exhibition, "Masterpieces of Japanese Art," 1965- 

 1966. Discussions were also held with the Cultural 

 Attache of the U.S. Embassy on plans for the next 

 Japan-America Cultural Conference. Examined 

 numerous objects in the Kyoto and Tokyo National 

 Museums, at the National Institute of Art Research, 

 various temples and private collections, and at dealers. 



November 5-7. Dr. Cahill, in New York, attended a meeting of the 



Committee on Studies of Chinese Civilization, 

 A.C.L.S.; and examined numerous objects at several 

 dealers. 



November 13-14. Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, attended the annual 



meeting of the American Research Center in Egypt; 

 and examined objects at several dealers. 



December 8-12. Dr. Pope, in New York, examined numerous objects 



at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, in a private 

 collection, and at several dealers. 

 1965 



January 2. Dr. Ettinghausen, in Winchester, Va., examined Indian 



miniatures in a private collection. 



January 9. Dr. Pope, in New York, attended a meeting of the 



Advisory Committee, Asia House Gallery. 



January 9. Dr. Cahill, in New York, attended a meeting of the 



Advisory Committee, Asia House Gallery; and 

 examined objects at several dealers. 



January 9. Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, attended a meeting of 



the Advisory Committee, Asia House Gallery; and 

 examined objects at several dealers. 



January 13-14. Dr. Ettinghausen, in Houston, Texas, visited the 



Museum of Fine Arts and the Exhibition of Mythologi- 

 cal Animals, Demons, and Monsters at the University 

 of St. Thomas; and in Dallas, visited the Museum of 

 Fine Arts. 



January 25-30. Dr. Stern attended, as chairman, the College Art 



Association meetings held at the Los Angeles County 

 Museum of Art; and examined numerous objects at 

 several museums, private collections, and dealers. 




278 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



1965 

 January 26- 

 February 2. 



February 1-2. 



February 12. 

 February 12-14. 



February 16-20. 



February 25- 

 March 2. 



February 28- 

 March 24. 



March 6. 



March 20. 



March 31- 

 April 10. 



Dr. Pope, in Los Angeles, attended meetings of the 

 College Art Association, including a meeting of the 

 Board; and examined Chinese and Japanese objects 

 at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. In San 

 Francisco, he examined Chinese paintings and bronzes 

 for the U.S. Collector of Customs; and at the M. H. de 

 Young Memorial Museum, numerous Chinese blue- 

 and-white porcelains in the Roy Leventritt Collection 

 and Chinese bronzes in the Avery Brundage Collection. 



Dr. Ettinghausen, in Hudson, N.Y., examined objects in 

 a private collection; and in New York, visited the 

 Institute of Fine Arts, New York University. 



Dr. Stern, in New York, examined numerous objects in 

 a private collection and at a dealer. 



Dr. Pope, in New York, attended meetings of the joint 

 ACLS/SSRC Committee on Grants for Research on 

 Asia; attended a.n exhibition of Indian sculpture at the 

 Metropolitan Museum of Art; and examined objects 

 at several dealers. 



Dr. Cahill, in Providence, R.I., attended the exhibition 

 of Oriental Arts at the Rhode Island School of Design 

 Museum; in New York, attended a meeting at New 

 York University to plan a summer seminar in Chinese 

 Art; and visited the "Relics of Ancient China in the 

 Singer Collection" at Asia House and the exhibition 

 of Indian sculpture at the Metropolitan Museum of 

 Art; examined objects at several dealers; in Princeton, 

 N.J., attended a meeting of the Chinese Art Subcom- 

 mittee of the Committee on the Study of Chinese 

 Civilization at Princeton University; and examined 

 objects in private collections and at several dealers. 



Dr. Stern, in Minneapolis and Mound, Minn., examined 

 numerous objects at the Minneapolis Institute of 

 Arts, and in a private collection. 



Dr. Pope, in Oxford and London, England, examined 

 Far Eastern objects in several museums and private 

 collections. 



Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, examined objects at 

 several dealers. 



Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, met with Miss Marjorie 

 Kevorkian of the Kevorkian Foundation; and ex- 

 amined objects at several dealers. 



Dr. Stern, in Philadelphia, attended meetings of the 

 Catalog Committee for the forthcoming Japanese 

 Exhibition; in New York, attended a committee 

 meeting of the Archives of American Art, and one for 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 



279 



April 2-6. 

 April 12-15. 



April 16-17. 

 April 19-23. 



April 23-24. 

 May 1-3. 



May 7-14. 

 May 8-10. 

 May 14-15. 



May 19-21. 



May 20-25. 



the Restorer Training Program, Institute of Fine Arts 

 Conservation Center; also visited several exhibitions, 

 and examined numerous objects at museums and at a 

 dealer. 



Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, examined objects for a 

 dealer; and in Ann Arbor, Mich., examined objects at 

 the Art Museum, University of Michigan. 



Dr. Pope, in Chicago, attended a meeting of the Ameri- 

 can Oriental Society, and examined objects at the Art 

 Institute and at a dealer; in Denver, Colo., examined 

 objects in the office of the U.S. Attorney. 



Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, examined objects at 

 several dealers. 



Mr. Gettens, at Harbor Island, Kure Beach, N.C., did 

 research at the Sea Horse Institute (International 

 Nickel Company); in Richmond, Va., visited the W.J. 

 Barrow Research Laboratory for Paper at the Virginia 

 Historical Society, and at the Virginia Museum of 

 Fine Arts examined Chinese bronze ceremonial vessels. 



Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, examined objects at 

 several dealers. 



Dr. Cahill, in Cambridge and Boston, attended a con- 

 ference on projects for the Committee on Studies of 

 Chinese Civilization; and examined objects at the 

 Fogg Art Museum and the Museum of Fine Arts, 

 including the Hobart Collection. 



Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, assisted in giving a 

 doctoral examination at Columbia University; and 

 examined objects in private collections and at dealers. 



Dr. Cahill, in Kansas City, examined Chinese paintings 

 in the William Rockhill Nelson Gallery of Art, in- 

 cluding the Nti Wa Chai Collection. 



Dr. Cahill, in New York, attended a meeting of the 

 Committee on Studies of Chinese Civilization; visited 

 the exhibition of Far Eastern art at the Metropolitan 

 Museum of Art; and examined objects in a private 

 collection and at several dealers. 



Mrs. West and Mrs. Quail, in New York, attended 

 meetings of the Museum Sales Association, at the 

 Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Museum of the 

 City of New York, and the Museum of Modern Art. 



Dr. Pope, in New York, attended a meeting of the 

 Advisory Council of Asia House Gallery, and examined 

 objects at several dealers; at Winterthur, Del., 

 attended meetings of the Association of Art Museum 

 Directors. 




280 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



1965 



May 27-22. Dr. Cahill, in New York, attended meetings of the 



Advisory Council, Asia House Gallery; and examined 

 objects in a private collection and at several dealers. 

 Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, attended a meeting 

 of the Advisory Council, Asia House Gallery; and 

 examined objects at a dealer. 



May 24-26. Mr. Gettens, in Philadelphia, met with the Executive 



Council of the IIC-AG; visited the Science Center for 

 Archaeology, University Museum; and examined 

 objects at the Philadelphia Museum of Art. 



May 26-28. Mr. Mielke, in Philadelphia, attended meetings of the 



American Association of Museums, and visited the 

 Philadelphia Museum of Art and the University 

 Museum. 



June 2-4. Mr. Gettens, in Columbus, Ohio, attended the dedica- 



tion of the new Chemical Abstracts Building, Ohio 

 State University; and in Oberlin, visited staff members 

 at Oberlin College. 



June 10-20. Mr. T. Katsuki, in Boston, New Haven, and New York, 



examined numerous Far Eastern objects at several 

 galleries and museums, and at dealers. 



Members of the staff held honorary posts, received recognition, and 

 undertook additional duties outside the Gallery as follows : 



Dr. Pope: Research Professor of Oriental Art, Department of the 

 History of Art, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Chairman, 

 Editorial Board of Ars Orientalis, University of Michigan. Chair- 

 man, Louise Wallace Hackney Scholarship Committee, American 

 Oriental Society. Member, Board of Management, Cosmos 

 Club, Washington, D.C. Member, Board of Directors, College 

 Art Association. Member, Association of Art Museum Directors. 

 Member, Board of Advisors of the Dumbarton Oaks Research 

 Library and Collection. Chairman, ACLS/SSRG Joint Com- 

 mittee for Grants for Research on Asia. Member, Advisory 

 Committee, Asia House Gallery, New York, N.Y. 



Dr. Stern: Member, Art Committee, Cosmos Club, Washington, 

 D.C. Advisor, City of San Francisco, for selection, artistic 

 appraisal, and cataloging of Japanese and Korean objects in 

 the Avery Brundage Collection. Member, ad hoc Committee 

 for a planning program for the conservation of Far Eastern 

 artistic and historic works, Freer Gallery of Art and New York 

 University. Member, International Editorial Advisory Board, 

 Japanese Ukiyoe Society, Tokyo, Japan. Member, Research 

 Committee, Smithsonian Institution. Chairman, Program Com- 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 281 



mittee, Far Eastern Section, College Art Association. Member, 

 Negotiations, Selection, and Cataloging Committees, America- 

 Canada Participating Museums for Memorial Exhibition 

 "Masterpieces of Japanese Art," 1965-66. 



Dr. Ettinghausen: Honorary member, German Archaeological In- 

 stitute, Berlin, Germany. Trustee, American Research Center in 

 Egypt, New York. Adjunct Professor of Fine Arts, Institute of 

 Fine Arts, New York University. Research Professor of Islamic 

 Art, University of Michigan. Member of Executive Committee, 

 Trustee, and Chairman of the Accessions Committee, Textile 

 Museum of the District of Columbia. Member, Editorial 

 Board, Art Bulletin, College Art Association of America, New 

 York. Member, Consultative Committee, Ars Orientalis, Uni- 

 versity of Michigan. Governor, Washington Society of the 

 Archaeological Institute of America, Washington, D.C. Mem- 

 ber, National Committee, Iran Foundation, Inc., for the Ad- 

 vancement of Health and Education in Iran, N.Y. Member, 

 Board of Directors, American Iqbal Society, Washington, D.C. 

 Member, Board of Governors, Middle East Institute, Washington, 

 D.C. Member, Editorial Board, Kairos, Salzburg, Germany. 

 Foreign Member, Society of Iranian National Monuments, 

 Teheran, Iran. Member, Administrative Committee of the 

 International Society for Oriental Research, Istanbul, Turkey, 

 and Frankfurt, Germany. Member, Board of Directors, Iran- 

 America Society, Washington, D.C. Associate Member, Institut 

 d'Egypte, Cairo, Egypt. Member, Advisory Committee, Asia 

 House Gallery, New York. Member, Advisory Board, Fairfax 

 County Cultural Association, Inc. 



Dr. Cahill: Adjunct Professor, Oriental Art, American University, 

 Washington. Trustee, Japan-America Society, Washington. 

 Member, Board of Directors, Sino-American Cultural Society, 

 Washington. Member, Advisory Council, Asia House Gallery, 

 New York. Chairman, Subcommittee on Chinese Art, Com- 

 mittee on Studies of Chinese Civilization, American Council 

 of Learned Societies. 



Mr. Trousdale: Member, Oriental Languages Honor Society, 

 University of California, Berkeley. Member, American Oriental 

 Society. Member, Archaeological Institute of America. Mem- 

 ber, Iran-America Society. 



Mr. Gettens: Section Editor, I-History, Education and Documen- 

 tation, Chemical Abstracts. Member, Board of Consulting Fellows, 

 Conservation Center, Institute of Fine Arts, New York Univer- 

 sity. Assistant Editor, IIC Abstracts: Abstracts of the Technical 




282 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Literature of Archaeology and the Fine Arts, London, England. 

 Vice President, Council of the International Institute for Con- 

 servation of Historic and Artistic Works (IIC), London, England. 

 Member, Executive Committee, IIC, American Group. Mem- 

 ber, International Council of Museums (ICOM), Committee 

 on Museum Laboratories. Member, Advisory Board, Inter- 

 museum Conservation Association, Oberlin College. Member, 

 Art Committee, Cosmos Club, Washington, D.C. Member, 

 Standing Committee for Commercial Standard CS 98-62 

 (Artists' Oil Paints), Commodity Standards Division, U.S. 

 Department of Commerce. Member, Committee to Advise on 

 the U.S. National Museum Conservation Laboratory. 



Mrs. FitzHugh: Editor, IIC Abstracts: Abstracts of the Technical Literature 

 of Archaeology and the Fine Arts, London, England. Member, 

 Board of Governors and Assistant Secretary, Washington Society 

 of the Archaeological Institute of America. 



Mr. Sugiura: Member, ad hoc Committee for planning program for 

 conservation of Far Eastern artistic and historic works, Freer 

 Gallery of Art and New York University. Member, Kokuho 

 Shuri Soken, Senmei Kai (Japan) . 



PERSONNEL 



1964 



July 13. Miss Barbara Bernhard reported for duty under the 



Intern Program and completed her internship 

 August 21. 



July 24. Miss Laura Schneider resigned as secretary-sten- 



ographer. 

 Miss Doreen Gee completed her research under a 

 University of California scholarship. 



September 4. Miss Kumi Sugiura resigned as apprentice to the 



Oriental picture mounter. 

 Robert Maeda completed his term as a Hackney 

 Scholar. 



September 8. Miss Susan Campbell resigned as clerk-typist. 



September 9. Mrs. Susan Redding reported for duty as clerk-typist. 



September 14. Leslie Benji Nerio reported for duty as a Hackney 



Scholar. 



September 21. Ben B. Johnson started work on the restoration of 



some of the Whistler paintings (contract worker) 

 and completed his work on June 25, 1965. 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 



283 



1964 

 October 9. 



October 12. 

 October 19. 

 November 9. 



November 15. 



December 4. 



December 7. 



1965 

 February 1. 



February 26. 

 March 1. 



June 7. 



June 16. 



Leslie Benji Nerio completed his term of duty as a 

 Hackney Scholar. 



Mrs. Blanche A. Shuler resigned as secretary-sten- 

 ographer and reported for duty as library assistant 

 on October 12. 



Miss Sarah M. Wilson reported for duty as secretary- 

 stenographer. 



Miss Marianne G. Melton reported*for duty as 

 secretary-stenographer. 



David J. Heflin reported for duty (contract worker) 

 during the absence of Thomas Goetting, museum 

 technician (Art). 



A. R. Kruik reported for volunteer duty as an observer 

 of Mrs. Sugiura's work methods. 



Mrs. Elisabeth W. FitzHugh resigned as assistant in 

 technical research (chemist, analytical). 



Miss Daphne Campbell reported for duty to work on 

 the "Bronze Book" manuscript (contract worker). 



William T. Chase, III, reported for duty as assistant 



in the technical laboratory (contract worker). 

 Mrs. Susan Redding resigned as clerk-typist. 

 Miss Katherine E. Jernberg reported for duty as 



clerk-typist. 

 Miss Susan Lyles reported for duty under the Intern 



Program. 

 Miss Priscilla Parsons reported for a 3-month term of 



study under a grant from the New York University, 



in the Near Eastern field. 





National Gallery of Art 



&»& 



tts.s 





National Gallery of Art 

 John Walker, Director 



ORGANIZATION 



The statutory members of the Board of Trustees of the National Gallery 

 of Art are the Chief Justice of the United States, the Secretary of State, 

 the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Secretary of the Smithsonian 

 Institution, ex officio. On May 6, 1965, Paul Mellon was reelected a 

 general trustee of the National Gallery of Art to serve in that capacity 

 for the term expiring July 1, 1975. The four other general trustees 

 continuing in office during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1965, were 

 John Hay Whitney, John N. Irwin II, Dr. Franklin D. Murphy, and 

 Lessing J. Rosenwald. On May 6, 1965, Paul Mellon was reelected by 

 the Board of Trustees to serve as president of the Gallery, and John 

 Hay Whitney was reelected vice president. 



The executive officers of the Gallery as of June 30, 1965, were as 

 follows: 



Chief Justice of the United States, Earl Warren, chairman. 



Paul Mellon, president. 



John Hay Whitney, vice president. 



Huntington Cairns, secretary-treasurer. 



John Walker, director. 



Ernest R. Feidler, administrator. 



Huntington Cairns, general counsel. 



Perry B. Cott, chief curator. 



J. Carter Brown, assistant director. 

 The three standing committees of the Board, as constituted at the 

 annual meeting on May 6, 1965, were as follows: 



Executive Committee 



Chief Justice of the United States, Earl Warren, chairman. 



Paul Mellon, vice chairman. 



Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, S. Dillon Ripley. 



John Hay Whitney. 



Franklin D. Murphy. 



287 




288 smithsonian year 1965 



Finance Committee 



Secretary of the Treasury, Henry H. Fowler, chairman. 



Paul Mellon. 



Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, S. Dillon Ripley. 



John Hay Whitney. 



John N. Irwin II. 



Acquisitions Committee 



Paul Mellon, chairman. 

 John Hay Whitney. 

 John N. Irwin II. 

 Lessing J. Rosenwald. 

 John Walker. 



PERSONNEL 



At the close of fiscal year 1965, full-time Government employees on 

 the permanent staff of the National Gallery of Art numbered 304. 

 The U.S. Civil Service regulations govern the appointment of employ- 

 ees paid from appropriated funds. 



APPROPRIATIONS 



For the fiscal year ended June 30, 1965, the Congress of the United 

 States, in the regular annual appropriation, and in a supplemental 

 appropriation required for pay increases, provided $2,227,000 to be 

 used for salaries and expenses in the operation and upkeep of the 

 National Gallery of Art, the protection and care of works of art acquired 

 by the Board of Trustees, and all administrative expenses incident 

 thereto, as authorized by the basic statute establishing the National 

 Gallery of Art, that is, the Joint Resolution of Congress approved 

 March 24, 1937 (50 Stat. 51), U.S. Code, title 20, sees. 71-75. 



The following obligations were incurred: 



Personnel compensation and benefits SI, 966, 805. 00 



All other items 260, 154. 56 



Total obligations $2, 226, 959. 56 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 



ATTENDANCE 



289 



There were 1,253,102 visitors to the Gallery during fiscal year 1965. 

 There was, therefore, an increase of 16,947 over fiscal year 1964. The 

 average daily attendance was 3,421. 



ACCESSIONS 



In all, 1,722 accessions were received by the Gallery as gifts, loans, 

 or deposits during the fiscal year. While this quantity was substan- 

 tially below the accessions in the preceding year, when the large and 

 important gift by Lessing J. Rosenwald of graphic-arts materials 

 swelled accessions to over 5,000, the gifts set forth below indicate 

 that rarely in the Gallery's history have the accessions included so 

 many outstanding paintings. 



GIFTS 



From the bequest of Chester Dale, New York, N.Y., the Gallery 

 received 245 paintings, chiefly of the Impressionist School, including 

 major works by Cezanne, Corot, Degas, Gauguin, van Gogh, Manet, 

 Matisse, Monet, Picasso, and Toulouse-Lautrec. In addition, the 

 following gifts or bequests were accepted by the Board of Trustees: 




290 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Donor 

 Ernest Iselin, New York, N.Y. 

 Patrick T. Jackson, Jr., 



Cambridge, Mass. 

 National Gallery of Art, 

 Ailsa Mellon Bruce Fund 

 Do 

 Do 



Do 



Arthur Sachs, Cannes, France 



Artist Title 



Sargent Mrs. Adrian Iselin 



Trumbull Patrick Tracy 



Sithium The Assumption of the Virgin 



Largilliere Elizabeth Throckmorton 



Guardi Carlo and Ubaldo Resisting 



the Enchantments of 

 Armida's Nymphs 

 do Erminia and the Shepherds 



French School, A Knight of the Golden 

 XV century Fleece 



Graphic Arts 




national gallery of art 

 Exchange of Work of Art 



291 



Portrait of Martin Luther, an engraving by Cranach, was exchanged for a superior 

 impression of the same work. 



Other Gifts 



In the fiscal year 1965 gifts of money were made by the Charles 

 Ulrick and Josephine Bay Foundation, Avalon Foundation, Samuel H. 

 Kress Foundation, Old Dominion Foundation, Mrs. Cordelia S. May, 

 Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, J. I. Foundation, Inc., Mr. Edwin 

 Binney III and the Lila Acheson Wallace Fund. 



Mrs. Mellon Bruce contributed additional funds for the purchase of 

 works of art for the National Gallery of Art and for educational purposes 

 related to works of art. 



WORK OF ART ON LOAN 



Portrait of a Man in a Fur-lined Coat by Rembrandt was received on loan 

 from the Fuller Foundation, Boston, Mass. 



WORKS OF ART ON LOAN RETURNED 



The following works of art on loan were returned during the fiscal 

 year: 



To Artist 



Col. and Mrs. Edgar W. Phillips 



Garbisch, New York, N.Y. 

 Jerome Hill, New York, N.Y. Delacroix 



Do do 



Claiborne Pell, Washington, Bingham 



D.C. 

 S. Dillon Ripley, Washington, Audubon 



D.C. 



Title 

 Philip Slade 



The Arab Tax 



The Fanatics of Tangiers 



The Jolly Flatboatmen 



Washington Sea Eagle 



PAINTINGS TRANSFERRED TO NATIONAL 

 PORTRAIT GALLERY 



Thirty-five portraits were transferred to the National Portrait Gallery. 




292 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



WORKS OF ART LENT 



Petersburg, Fla. 

 Smithsonian Institution, 

 Museum of History and 

 Technology, Armed Forces 

 History Hall 



Pine 



General William Smallwood 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 293 



The following exhibitions were held at the National Gallery of Art 

 during the fiscal year 1965: 



7000 Tears of Iranian Art. Continued from the preceding fiscal year 

 through July 19, 1964. 



Prints by Whistler from the National Gallery of Art Collection. Continued 

 from the preceding fiscal year through July 23, 1964. 



Selected Renderings from the Index of American Design. July 2, 1964, 

 through October 1, 1964. 



French 18th Century Color Prints from the Widener Collection. July 30, 1964, 

 through October 1, 1964. 



Exhibition of Watercolors by Perkins Harnley from the Index of American 

 Design. August 12, 1964, through November 3, 1964. 



15th and 16th Century German Prints from the National Gallery of Art Collection. 

 October 2, 1964, through December 6, 1964; January 11, 1965, 

 through February 11, 1965. 



Drawings of the 15th and 16th Centuries from the Wallraf-Richartz Museum. 

 October 4, 1964, through November 1, 1964. 



Blake's Engravings of Dante's Inferno and The Book of Job from the W. G' 

 Russell Allen Collection. October 22, 1964, through January 10, 1965. 



William Blake: Poet, Printer, Prophet. October 25, 1964, through No- 

 vember 22, 1964. 



Prints by Altdorfer, Durer, Lucas van Leyden, and Schongauer from the National 

 Gallery of Art Collection. October 26, 1964, through December 15, 

 1964; January 14, 1965, through April 22, 1965. 



Piranesi Etchings of Prisons and Views of Rome from the National Gallery of 

 Art Collection. November 4, 1964, through April 18, 1965. 




294 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Designs for the Grave of the Late President John F. Kennedy. November 17, 

 1964, through December 13, 1964. 



1964 Christmas Card Subjects from the Graphic Arts Collection. December 7, 



1964, through January 10, 1965. 



The Watercolor Drawings of John White. January 31, 1965, through 

 February 22, 1965. 



Landscape Prints by Rembrandt and Other Dutch Artists from the Rosenwald 

 Collection. February 12, 1965, through May 19, 1965. 



Eyewitness to Space — sponsored by the National Aeronautics and Space 

 Administration. March 14, 1965, through May 23, 1965. 



Rosenwald Miniatures and Widener French 18th Century Books. April 24, 



1965, through May 2, 1965. 



The Chester Dale Bequest. May 6, 1965, to continue into the next fiscal 

 year. 



Graphic Arts from the Chester Dale Collection. May 6, 1965, to continue 

 into the next fiscal year. 



Exhibition Illustrating Richard Bales' Index of American Design Suite No. 4. 

 May, 20, 1965, to continue into the next fiscal year. 



Exhibition of Rembrandt's Portrait of the Artist's Son Titus on loan from the 

 Norton Simon Foundation. May 26, 1965, to continue into the next 

 fiscal year. 



Sketches by Constable from the Victoria and Albert Museum. June 6, 1965, to 

 continue into the next fiscal year. 



White House Festival of the Arts Exhibition. June 18, 1965, to continue 

 into the next fiscal year. 



Exhibitions of recent accessions: Tiberius and Agrippina by Rubens, 

 November 29, 1964, through December 20, 1964; A Knight of the 

 Golden Fleece, French School, XV Century, December 22, 1964, 

 through February 5, 1965; Portrait of a Man in a Fur-lined Coat by 

 Rembrandt, lent by The Fuller Foundation, from January 8, 1965; 

 The Cornell Farm by Edward Hicks, Captain Samuel Chandler and Mrs. 

 Samuel Chandler by Winthrop Chandler, February 6, 1965 through 

 February 14, 1965; Watson and the Shark by Copley, February 21, 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 295 



1965, through April 4, 1965; Carlo and Ubaldo Resisting the Enchantments 

 of Armida's Nymphs and Erminia and the Shepards by Francesco and Gian 

 Antonio Guardi, April 4, 1 965, through April 27, 1 965; The Assumption 

 of the Virgin by Miguel Sithium, from April 18, 1965; Mrs. Adrian Iselin 

 by Sargent, Winter Harmony by Twachtman, and Brazilian Seascape by 

 Heade, May 16, 1965, through June 8, 1965. 



TRAVELING EXHIBITIONS 



Special exhibitions of graphic arts from the National Gallery of Art 

 collections were circulated during the fiscal year to 61 museums, 

 universities, schools, and art centers in the United States and abroad. 



Index of American Design. Thirty-four traveling exhibitions of material 

 from the Index were circulated to 17 States, the District of Columbia, 

 and one foreign country, for 62 showings. 



CURATORIAL ACTIVITIES 



Under the direction of chief curator Perry B. Cott, the curatorial 

 department accessioned 324 gifts to the Gallery during the fiscal year 

 1965. Advice was given with respect to 1,740 works of art brought to 

 the Gallery for expert opinion, and 28 visits to collections were made 

 by members of the staff in connection with other gifts. About 6,189 

 inquiries, many of them requiring research, were answered verbally 

 and by letter. 



Assistant chief curator William P. Campbell served as a member of 

 the Special Fine Arts Committee of the Department of State. 



Curator of painting H. Lester Cooke continued as consultant to 

 NASA with duties of organizing and supervising commissions to 

 artists for paintings of themes relating to the Space Program. He also 

 acted as judge for the Tri-State Exhibition, Evansville, Ind., and "The 

 Plains," a local art exhibit, during the fiscal year. 



The Richter Archives received and cataloged 485 photographs on 

 exchange from museums here and abroad; 1,328 photographs were 

 purchased, and about 500 reproductions have been added to the Rich- 

 ter Archives. Five hundred photographs have been added to the 

 Inconographic Index. 



RESTORATION 



Francis Sullivan, resident restorer of the Gallery, made regular and 

 systematic inspection of all works of art in the Gallery and on loan to 




296 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Government buildings in Washington and periodically removed dust 

 and bloom as required. He relined, cleaned, and restored 10 paintings 

 and gave special treatment to 42. Thirty-seven paintings were x-rayed 

 as an aid in research. He continued experiments with synthetic 

 materials as suggested by the National Gallery of Art Fellowship at 

 the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research, Pittsburgh, Pa. Tech- 

 nical advice was given in response to 252 telephone inquiries. Special 

 treatment was given to works of art belonging to Government agencies, 

 including the U.S. Capitol, Treasury Department, the White House, 

 U.S. Coast Guard Academy, and the Freer Gallery of Art. 



PUBLICATIONS 



The volume by Gallery director John Walker entitled National 

 Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., published by Harry N. Abrams, Inc. 

 in 1963, was translated and published in Germany, France, and 

 Spain in the respective languages. It was also published in London, 

 United Kingdom, by Thames & Hudson. 



All the curatorial staff cooperated in the preparation of the three- 

 volume definitive catalog covering the entire Chester Dale Collection — 

 Eighteenth and Nineteenth Century Paintings and Sculpture of the French 

 School, Twentieth Century Paintings and Sculpture of the French School, and 

 Paintings Other Than French. 



The senior fellow of the National Gallery of Art Research Project 

 at the Mellon Institute in Pittsburgh, Pa., Dr. Robert L. Feller, 

 published several articles related to the important scientific research 

 which he has been conducting. They are Control of the Deteriorating 

 Effects of Light on Museum Objects in Museum, September 1964 issue; 

 What's in a Name: Dammar in The Crucible, October 1964 issue; The 

 Use of an Electrically-Conducting Glass Panel as a Heating Surface (with 

 Jeanne L. Kostich) in Bulletin American Group — IIC, October 1964 

 issue; and Critical Pigment Volume Concentration and Chalking in Paints 

 (with J. J. Matous) in Bulletin American Group — IIC, October 1964 

 issue. 



H. Lester Cooke, curator of painting, wrote an article for Art in 

 America, April 1965 issue, entitled "A Plunger in the Market: Chester 

 Dale and His Collection." 



Richard Field, assistant curator of graphic arts, prepared the catalog 

 for the Pennsylvania State University exhibition Selected 15th Century 

 Prints from the Lessing J. Rosenwald Collection, National Gallery of Art. 



Michael Mahoney, museum curator, wrote an article for the Min- 

 neapolis Institute of Arts Bulletin, September 1964 issue, entitled "Salvator 

 Rosa's Saint Humphrey." 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 297 



In April 1965 the Gazette des Beaux-Arts published an article entitled 

 "Some Later Works of Piero di Cosimo," by Everett P. Fahy, Jr., 

 National Gallery of Art Finley fellow. 



PUBLICATIONS FUND 



In fiscal year 1965 the Publications Fund placed on sale five new 

 publications. These were: the Pantheon Story of Art for Young People, 

 illustrated almost exclusively from the National Gallery of Art Col- 

 lection; two books illustrated from subjects in the Rosenwald Col- 

 lection — The Bite of the Print and George Rouault's Miserere; American 

 Crafts and Folk Arts, based on the Index of American Design; and 

 707 Masterpieces of American Primitive Painting from the Collection of Edgar 

 William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch. In addition, three new catalogs 

 of the Chester Dale Collection were published; these were made 

 available to the public with the opening of the Chester Dale Bequest 

 exhibition. Thirty-nine new 11- by 14-inch color reproductions 

 were published which brought the total subjects on sale to 277. 

 Twenty-eight new postcard subjects were added, which results in 224 

 subjects now being available to the public. Four new large repro- 

 ductions were published with Gallery assistance: Poussin — 77z* 

 Assumption of the Virgin; Sassetta and Assistant — Saint Anthony Leaving 

 His Monastery; Turner — The Dogana and San Giorgio Maggiore; and 

 Monet — Rouen Cathedral, West Faqade, Sunlight. 



EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM 



The program of the educational department was carried out under 

 the direction of Raymond S. Stites, curator in charge of education, 

 and his staff. Lectures, conducted tours, and special talks were given 

 on the works of art in the Gallery's collections. 



Attendance for the general tours was 18,905 — an increase of 1,500 

 over last year. Attendance for all regularly scheduled general tours, 

 tours of the week, and picture-of-the-week talks amounted to 36,843. 



In a new series, the Radio Picture of the Week, 22 discussions of 

 individual paintings in the Gallery's collections were prepared by the 

 educational department and broadcast during the intermissions of 

 the Gallery's Sunday evening concerts each week from October 4 

 through February 28. A listener was able to subscribe on a monthly 

 basis and follow the discussions with a color reproduction before him. 

 Subscriptions so entered numbered 1,245. From replies to a question- 

 naire, it is estimated that many subscriptions were utilized by complete 




298 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



families or assigned to school classes. On the basis of radio audience 

 ratings, it is estimated that the total number of listeners to the series 

 was approximately 400,000. 



Special tours, lectures, and conferences (a total of 467) were arranged 

 to serve 16,310 persons. These special appointments (which increased 

 by seven over 1964) were made for Government agency groups, the 

 Foreign Service Institute, the Foreign Students Council, the Armed 

 Forces, club and study groups, religious organizations, conventions, 

 museum officials, hospital representatives, and school students and 

 faculty members from various parts of the country. 



The program of training volunteer docents continued, and special 

 instruction was given to 1 26 ladies from the Junior League of Wash- 

 ington and the American Association of University Women. By 

 arrangement with the public, private, and parochial schools of the 

 District of Columbia and of the surrounding counties in Maryland 

 and Virginia, these two organizations conducted tours for 2,654 classes 

 from the Metropolitan area of Washington. The 75,934 children in 

 these classes represented an increase of 7,098 over last year. These 

 volunteer docents also guided 794 Safety Patrol girls from Atlanta, 

 Ga., on tours of the Gallery. 



Forty-four lectures were given on Sunday afternoons in the audi- 

 torium. Of these, 26 were delivered by guest lecturers, 8 by members 

 of the staff, and 5 were full-length film presentations. The distin- 

 guished Sir Isaiah Berlin delivered the 14th annual series of the A. W. 

 Mellon Lectures in the Fine Arts on six consecutive Sundays beginning 

 March 14, 1965, on the general subject "Sources of Romantic Art." 



Attendance at the above-mentioned Sunday afternoon programs in 

 the auditorium totaled 12,569. This was lower in fiscal year 1965 

 than in 1964 inasmuch as the number of Sunday programs dropped 

 from 52 to 44. However, there was a 10.4 percent increase in average 

 attendance per Sunday. 



The slide library of the Educational Department has a total of 

 48,951 slides in its permanent and lending collections. During the 

 year, 1,327 slides were added to the collections. Altogether, 317 per- 

 sons borrowed a total of 8,603 slides, and it is estimated that these 

 slides were seen by 19,671 viewers. 



Members of the staff participated in outside activities which included 

 lecturing at various schools, clubs, and Government agencies. 

 Two members of the staff taught evening courses at local institutions. 

 Staff members prepared and recorded scripts for the Lectour and 

 radio talks, and prepared material for the school-tour program and 

 picture-of-the-week texts which are sold with reproductions of the 

 picture. 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 299 



The project undertaken two years ago in connection with the "Widen- 

 ing Horizons" program, designed by various Government agencies to 

 introduce high school students to career opportunities offered in Wash- 

 ington, was continued. Mr. Stites gave six briefing lectures and six 

 tours to the volunteers conducting this program. These tours and 

 lectures were attended by 1,570 persons — an increase of 755 over the 

 previous year. 



A printed calendar of the programs and events of the Gallery was 

 prepared and distributed to a mailing list of an average of approxi- 

 mately 7,500 names. 



EXTENSION SERVICES 



The office of extension services, under the direction of Grose Evans, 

 circulated to the public traveling exhibitions, films, slide lectures with 

 texts, film strips, and other educational materials. 



Traveling exhibits are lent free of charge except for shipping expenses. 

 The total number of exhibits in circulation was 1 04. These were cir- 

 culated in 844 bookings, an increase of 445 over the preceding year's 

 total of 399. 



Twenty-eight prints of two films on paintings in the National Gallery 

 of Art were circulated in 316 bookings, an increase of 145 over last year. 



A total of 2,150 slide lecture sets was circulated in 5,717 bookings, an 

 increase of 2,282 over the previous year. 



Based on the conservative average audience estimates per booking 

 used for the past four years, the audience served by the traveling 

 exhibitions circulated by the Gallery was approximately 422,000; for 

 films the estimated audience was 94,800; and for slide lectures and 

 film strips, the audience was an estimated 343,020. 



In addition, 64 exhibits were circulated by three outside groups, 

 a national church organization, the New York State school system, 

 and the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service. These 

 exhibits were seen by an estimated 111,243 viewers. 



It is estimated, therefore, that the extension services reached approx- 

 imately 971,063 people during fiscal year 1965 as against 549,524 in 

 fiscal year 1964. 



Mr. Evans prepared texts for new slide lectures and traveling ex- 

 hibitions, made recordings of the texts for three slide lectures, and 

 supervised the translation into French and recording of a lecture 

 that will be circulated for the use of French language teachers. Five 

 new subjects were added to the slide lectures and seven new subjects 

 to the traveling exhibitions. Mr. Evans attended conferences to 




300 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



demonstrate the extension services and to keep abreast of new develop- 

 ments in the audiovisual field. 



LIBRARY 



During the year the library, under the supervision of Ruth E. 

 Carlson, accessioned 5,919 publications obtained by gift, exchange, 

 or purchase. A total of 2,313 photographs, acquired by exchange or 

 purchase with private funds, was added to the photographic archives. 



During the year 1,895 publications were cataloged and classified; 

 6,686 cards were filed in the main catalog and the shelf-list. Library 

 of Congress cards were used for 574 titles; original cataloging was 

 done for 419 titles. Periodicals recorded were 3,129, periodicals 

 circulated were 10,591, and 3,725 books were charged to the staff. 

 There were 5,852 books shelved in regular routine. 



During the past fiscal year the library borrowed 1,242 books and 

 received 6 photographic copies on the interlibrary loan program. 



The exchange program was continued and the library distributed 

 298 National Gallery of Art publications, and received 790 catalogs 

 under this program. 



The library is a depository for black-and-white photographs of works 

 of art in the Gallery's collections. These are maintained for use in 

 research by the staff, for exchange with other institutions, for repro- 

 duction in approved publications, and for sale to the public. Approx- 

 imately 9,111 photographs were added to the stock in the library 

 during the year, and 1,504 orders for 6,663 photographs were filled. 

 There were 425 permits for reproduction of 1,003 subjects processed 

 in the library. 



INDEX OF AMERICAN DESIGN 



Under the supervision of Grose Evans, the Index of American 

 Design circulated, in addition to the traveling exhibitions referred to 

 above (page 295), 133 sets of Index material color slides (6,536) 

 throughout the United States, and 254 photographs of Index subjects 

 were used for exhibits, study, and publication. The file of photographs 

 was increased by 44 negatives and 84 prints. Fourteen permits to 

 reproduce 114 subjects from the Index were issued. Approximately 

 271 visitors studied the Index material for research purposes and to 

 collect material for publication and design. Special exhibitions were 

 arranged of Index material, including one for the USIA for circulation 

 overseas. 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 301 



The curator of the Index held special conferences with a number of 

 persons and lectured to several groups about the Index. He also 

 attended the Alexandria Antiques Forum. 



MAINTENANCE OF THE BUILDING AND GROUNDS 



The Gallery building, mechanical equipment, and grounds have been 

 maintained throughout the year at the established standards. 



The renovation of the skylight on the west wing of the building has 

 been completed, and considerable progress has been made on the east 

 wing. When completed, this renovating is expected to give the Gallery 

 building a completely watertight skylight for the first time in its history. 



Six new gallery rooms were completed for the exhibition of the 

 Chester Dale Collection of paintings. 



The Gallery greenhouse continued to produce flowering and foliage 

 plants in quantities sufficient for all decorative needs on holidays, for 

 special openings, and for day-to-day requirements of the Garden Courts. 



Contracts were entered into for the installation of special security 

 devices for the protection of the cases containing Renaissance jewelry 

 and other art objects in Gallery G—2. This is in the nature of a pilot- 

 plant installation which, if it fulfills its promise, will be extended to 

 other areas. 



LECTOUR 



During the fiscal year 1965 Lectour, the Gallery's electronic guide 

 system, was used by 58,121 visitors. 



MUSIC PROGRAM 



Forty Sunday evening concerts were given during the fiscal year in 

 the East Garden Court. Thirty-three of the concerts were sponsored 

 by funds bequeathed to the Gallery by William Nelson Cromwell. 

 The 22d American Music Festival of seven concerts was sponsored by 

 the Guibenkian Foundation, Inc. The National Gallery Orchestra, 

 conducted by Richard Bales, played nine concerts at the Gallery during 

 the season. Two of these orchestra concerts were made possible in part 

 by a grant from the Music Performance Trust Fund of the American 

 Recording Industry. 



The National Gallery of Art strings, conducted by Mr. Bales, fur- 

 nished music during four of the Gallery's openings. The orchestra 

 program on October 25, 1964, was played in honor of United Nations 




302 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Day, and the concert on January 17 featured Mr. Bales's "The Repub- 

 lic" and was played in honor of the inauguration of the President and 

 Vice President of the United States. 



Seven Sunday evenings, April 25 through June 6, were devoted to the 

 Gallery's 22d American Music Festival. All concerts were broadcast 

 in their entirety by WGMS-AM and FM. Washington music critics 

 continued their regular coverage of the concerts. During the inter- 

 mission periods of the Sunday evening broadcasts, members of the 

 educational staff spoke on art matters, and Mr. Bales discussed the 

 musical programs. Mr. Bales appeared as guest conductor at various 

 places throughout the country and taught a class in composition. The 

 Gallery orchestra played a number of concerts at schools and churches 

 in nearby towns and cities. 



Two hour-long television programs of the National Gallery of Art 

 orchestra with Mr. Bales conducting were taped by WTOP-TV, and 

 these, together with two previous programs which were repeated, were 

 telecast during the winter and spring. 



Mr. Bales completed and performed two new works, one of which 

 was commissioned by the Kindler Foundation of Washington. He also 

 participated in the Civil War Centennial celebration and received an 

 award for the National Gallery of Art. The Gallery orchestra and Mr. 

 Bales also received a certificate of award from the American Association 

 of University Women for an outstanding cultural and educational 

 contribution to the community through the television programs. This 

 is the third year that the Gallery has been so honored. 



OTHER ACTIVITIES 



J. Carter Brown, assistant director, served in an advisory capacity to 

 the White House in the organization and installation of the art in the 

 White House Festival of the Arts, June 14, 1965. He was assisted by 

 H. Lester Cooke, curator of painting, and other members of the Gallery 

 staff. At the request of the President, the National Gallery of Art 

 provided lunch for the 200 guests of the White House Festival of the 

 Arts. 



Also at the request of the White House, the Gallery was opened 

 especially for the National Conference of the Arts Councils of America, 

 June 18, 1965. The delegates and guests of the International Pub- 

 lishers Association spent an evening at the Gallery on June 4, 1965, 

 during their convention. 



The Gallery provided facilities for the ceremony held by the Post 

 Office Department on December 2, 1 964, in honor of the first-day issue 

 of a stamp dedicated to the Fine Arts. 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 303 



In response to requests, 41,766 copies of "An Invitation to the Gal- 

 lery" and 2,100 information booklets were sent to Senators, Repre- 

 sentatives, and various organizations for distribution. 



Henry Beville, head of the photographic laboratory, and his assistants 

 processed 62,378 items including negatives, prints, slides, color trans- 

 parencies, and color separations. 



A total of 196 permits to copy works of art in the National Gallery 

 of Art and 92 permits to photograph were issued during the fiscal year. 



During the 1965 inaugural ceremonies, the Trustees were pleased to 

 make the Gallery available for the Reception of Distinguished Ladies 

 on January 18, 1965. Over 6,500 invited guests were received in the 

 two Garden Courts and viewed the collections. Both the First Lady, 

 Mrs. Johnson, and the wife of the Vice President, Mrs. Humphrey, 

 assisted in the receiving lines. 



AUDIT OF PRIVATE FUNDS OF THE GALLERY 



An audit of the private funds of the Gallery will be made for the 

 fiscal year ended June 30, 1965, by Price Waterhouse & Co., public 

 accountants. A report of the audit will be forwarded to the Gallery. 





Girl with a Hoop by Auguste Renoir (1841-1919). Canvas 49^ inches X 

 30H inches. Chester Dale Collection, 1962. National Gallery of Art. 




The Assumption of the Virgin by Miguel Sithium (circa 1465/70-1525). Canvas 8% 

 inches X 6 l A inches. Ailsa Mellon Bruce Fund. National Gallery of Art. 




Mademoiselle Malo by Edgar Degas (1834-1917). Canvas 3 Us inches X 25^i 

 inches. Chester Dale Collection. National Gallery of Art. 




A Knight of the Golden Fleece. Flemish School, 15th century, circa 1495. 26H 

 X 2VA inches. Gift of Arthur Sachs. National Gallery of Art. 




A Corner of the Moulin de la Galette by Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. 39 l A X 35 V% 

 inches. Chester Dale Collection. National Gallery of Art. 




Patrick Tracy by John Trumbull (American, 1756-1843). Canvas 

 9\y 2 X 52^ 8 inches. Gift of Patrick T. Jackson, Jr., 1964. National 

 Gallery of Art. 




Carlo and Ubaldo Resisting the Enchantments of Armida's Nymphs by Gian Antonio 

 (1699-1760) and Francesco Guardi (1712-1793). Canvas 98H X 181 

 inches. Ailsa Mellon Bruce Fund. National Gallery of Art. 




Still Life by Paul Cezanne (French, 1839-1906). Canvas 26 X 32^ inches. 

 Chester Dale Collection, 1962. National Gallery of Art. 




Canal Zone Biological Area 



789-427—66—32 





Canal Zone Biological Area 

 Martin H. Moynihan, Director 



The Canal Zone Biological Area, a bureau of the Smithsonian Insti- 

 tution, is responsible for maintaining Barro Colorado Island in Gatun 

 Lake, Canal Zone, as a biological preserve. The island is approxi- 

 mately 3,600 acres in area. It is almost completely covered by "tropical 

 monsoon forest" (see tabulations on the annual rainfall below) and 

 contains a rich fauna. One of the few places in the American tropics 

 close to large centers of human population, yet largely unaffected by 

 recent human activities, it is particularly suitable and convenient for 

 research on many aspects of tropical biology and the tropical environ- 

 ment. 



The Canal Zone Biological Area also has authority to use a large 

 tract of land on the adjacent mainland near Gamboa, Canal Zone. 

 This mainland territory is covered by various types of second-growth 

 vegetation and patches of forest which are more humid than the 

 forest on Barro Colorado Island. 



The bureau maintains a laboratory on Barro Colorado Island, with 

 attached library and living quarters, available for use by scientists and 

 students from all over the world. 



The bureau's scientific staff conducts research on several groups of 

 animals and plants on Barro Colorado itself, in adjacent regions of the 

 Canal Zone and the Republic of Panama, and in other parts of 

 Central and South America. 



RESEARCH ACTIVITIES 



One hundred and nine scientists and students, representing 14 

 nations, worked on Barro Colorado Island for at least several days, 

 and used research facilities on the mainland. This represents a marked 

 increase over previous years. These researches dealt with a wide 

 range of disciplines. Fields receiving particular attention were behav- 

 ioral studies of insects, fishes, amphibians, birds, and mammals; sys- 

 tematics of insects and arachnids; communication systems of moths, 

 birds, and primates; and the ecology of species diversity in vertebrates 

 and higher plants. The General Electric Corporation, on behalf of 

 the U.S. Army, conducted extensive investigations of the acoustical 

 properties of the island forest. 



307 




308 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Dr. Austin Stanley Rand, a herpetologist, was added to the staff 

 last year, bringing the total of senior staff scientists to four. 



Dr. Robert L. Dressier continued his studies of orchids and orchid 

 pollination, supported by the National Science Foundation. In con- 

 nection with this project, he made brief trips to Brazil, Peru, several 

 U.S. museums, and a longer trip to Costa Rica. 



Dr. Neal G. Smith continued his field studies on the evolution and 

 genetics of egg-mimicry in parasitic cuckoos, the behavior of oropen- 

 dolas, and initiated an experimental study of avian species diversity 

 in tropical grasslands. He visited museums in Washington, New York, 

 Ithaca, and Boston. 



Dr. Rand attended the Lizard Ecology Symposium in Kansas City, 

 Mo., and the meeting of the American Association of Ichthyologists 

 and Herpetologists in Lawrence, Kan. He also visited the Chicago 

 Natural History Museum, Harvard University, and the University of 

 Pennsylvania for consultation on his continuing research on the evolu- 

 tion of the West Indian Anoles, and on concepts and techniques of 

 bioacoustics. 



Dr. Martin H. Moynihan continued research on the communication 

 systems and social behavior of New World primates and various groups 

 of passerine birds. A study of geographic variation in social behavior 

 among Andean birds is being supported by a grant from the National 

 Science Foundation. In connection with this work, Dr. Moynihan 

 made several field trips to Colombia and Venezuela, and visited 

 laboratories in London, Oxford, Cambridge, Paris, and New Orleans. 

 He also delivered a paper in the symposium on social interactions 

 among primates at the American Association for the Advancement 

 of Science meeting in Montreal. 



The following papers by staff members of the Canal Zone Biological 

 Area appeared in various publications: 

 Dressler, R. L. Encyclia trachycarpa refound. American Orchid Soc. 



Bull., vol. 33, pp. 587-588. 1964. 

 . Nomenclatural notes on the Orchidaceae II. Taxon 13, 



pp. 246-249. 1964. 

 Moynihan, M. Some behavior patterns of platyrrhine monkeys I. 



The Night Monkey (Aotus trivirgatus). Smithsonian Misc. Coll., 



vol. 146(5), pp. 1-84. 1964. 

 Rand, A. S. An observation on Dracaena guyanensis foraging under 



water. Herpetologica, vol. 20, p. 207. 1964. 

 . Ecological distribution in anoline lizards of Puerto Rico. 



Ecology, vol. 45, pp. 745-752. 1964. 

 . Inverse relation between temperature and shyness in the 



lizard Anolis lineatopus. Ecology, vol. 45, pp. 863-864. 1964. 




CANAL ZONE BIOLOGICAL AREA 309 



. On the frequency and extent of naturally occurring foot 



injuries in Tropodurus torquatus (Sauria: Iguanidae). Papeis Avul- 

 sos do Departamento de Zoologia, Sao Paulo, Brazil, vol. 17, 

 pp. 225-228. 1965. 



BUILDINGS AND EQUIPMENT 



An electrical cable system from the mainland to Barro Colorado 

 Island was installed, providing the island with well-regulated 60-cycle, 

 120-volt single-phase and 220- volt single- and three-phase power. 

 Electrical power capacity was increased by a factor of 5, enabling the 

 use of more sensitive instruments than was possible previously when 

 erratic generators provided the electricity. The internal electrical 

 wiring system also was revised to provide a larger margin for future 

 power requirements. 



The laboratory building was extensively remodeled, permitting more 

 efficient use of available space. A soundproof room has been installed 

 to facilitate acoustical investigations. 



Radio transmitters for communication between Barro Colorado and 

 the mainland were installed and are available for use at any time of 

 the day or night in case of emergencies. 



The island's extensive trail system was cleared and trail markers 

 replaced. 



Expansion of the library continued, and the bureau now has more 

 than 4,700 volumes and receives 84 periodicals. In all probability, 

 this is the largest and best general biological library in the American 

 tropics. It is frequently used by members of other scientific and educa- 

 tional organizations in the Canal Zone and the Republic of Panama, 

 as well as by the scientists and students conducting research on Barro 

 Colorado itself. 



New animal cages were constructed, and many of the older cages 

 were repaired. 



Normal maintenance activities were carried on as usual. The 

 launches required extensive repairs as they age rapidly. Living 

 quarters were repaired and modified. 



FINANCES 



In addition to $179,640 appropriated to the Smithsonian Institution 

 by Congress for the regular operations of the Canal Zone Biological 

 Area, trust funds for the maintenance of the island and its living facil- 

 ities are obtained by collections from visitors and scientists, table 

 subscriptions, and donations. 




310 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



The following institutions continued their support of the laboratory 

 through the payment of table subscriptions: Eastman Kodak Co., 

 New York Zoological Society, and the Smithsonian Institution. 

 Donations also are gratefully acknowledged from Dr. Eugene Eisen- 

 mann, G. M. Goethe, and E. F. Morris. 



PLANS 



It is anticipated that limited facilities on both sides of the isthmus 

 will soon be available for marine research. Dr. Ira Rubinoff, a marine 

 biologist, will join the staff next year. 



Five research assistantships were made available this year, and the 

 following predoctoral students were chosen: 



Michael Robinson, Oxford University, will study the behavior of 

 leaf and stick mimicking insects. Nicholas Smythe, University of 

 Maryland, is interested in the behavior and ecology of agoutis and 

 pacas. Eugene Morton will investigate the effects of physical factors 

 in the environment on the kinds and forms of vocalizations given by 

 various animals. Martin Naumann, University of Kansas, will study 

 neotropical social wasps. John Oppenheimer, University of Illinois, 

 will initiate a long-term study of the social organization of the 

 White-Faced Monkey (Cebus capucinus). 



A program has been established with the Organization of American 

 States providing support for scientists and students, especially Latin 

 Americans who do not have access to many other sources of support. 

 Applications are now being reviewed by the Organization of American 

 States. 



It is hoped to continue the expansion of the scientific staff and the 

 research activities of the bureau, and to attract larger numbers of visit- 

 ing scientists and students. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



The Canal Zone Biological Area can operate only with the excellent 

 cooperation of the Canal Zone Government and the Panama Canal 

 Company. Thanks are due especially to the Customs and Immigration 

 officials; the Police Division; the Division of Sanitation; and the Elec- 

 tronics Section of the Electrical Division. Also deeply appreciated 

 are the advice and assistance provided by the Gorgas Memorial Lab- 

 oratory, the Inter-American Geodetic Survey, the Division of Veteri- 

 nary Medicine, Dr. W. John Smith of Harvard University, and R. A. 

 Botzenmayer, chief engineer, Southern Command Network. 




CANAL ZONE BIOLOGICAL AREA 



311 



ANNUAL RAINFALL, BARRO COLORADO ISLAND, CANAL ZONE, 



1925-64 



COMPARISON OF 1963 AND 1964 RAINFALL, BARRO COLORADO 



ISLAND 



Year 



108.94 113.25 107.28 



+ 5.97 



Dry season 

 Wet season 



19.11 5.24 



89.83 108.01 



8.32 

 98.96 



-3.08 

 + 9.05 





Dr. Neal Smith, staff zoologist, examining eggs of parasitic cuckoos in the 

 main laboratory building, Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone. 



Vocalization of frogs being recorded by Dr. Stanley Rand, staff zoologist, 

 outside the main animal house, Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone. 




-'<2Vn> . I 



View of laboratory clearing from dock area, Barro Colorado Island, Canal 



Zone. 



Laboratory clearing at Barro Colorado Island, looking E.N.E. across Gatun 

 Lake. An insect trap is located in right foreground. 




National Air Museum 





National Air Museum 

 S. Paul Johnston, Director 



Fiscal year 1965 was a period of transition for the National Air 

 (and Space) Museum. Not only did long-term plans for the new fa- 

 cility to house the museum's collections come into clearer focus, but all 

 museum programs were subject to critical reexamination. 



Orientation toward the "famous first" which had long dominated 

 museum thinking was subordinated in favor of programs designed to 

 yield scientific information and education tailored to fit the needs of 

 our potential audiences in this period of rapidly advancing aerospace 

 technology. 



1 . For the masses who are expected to visit the new facility yearly, 

 our displays must present in clear and understandable fashion a bal- 

 anced story of aerospace development — not only of where we have 

 been and where we are but also where we are headed. 



2. For the relatively small group of serious researchers in aerospace 

 technology and/or history, the museum must reorganize its already 

 extensive research resources and make them more readily available. 



3. For those whose need-to-know includes the actual examination 

 of aerospace hardware, the NAM study collection at Silver Hill, Md., 

 must be better documented and better housed. All these matters re- 

 quired detailed review. 



One of the first actions of the present director on taking office in 

 September 1964 was to assemble a group of outside consultants to take 

 an objective look at the over-all problem. None of these advisers 

 were museum people as such, but each had a long background in some 

 aspects of aerospace science and technology. Their collective exper- 

 ience covered the entire range of air and space development. All 

 were sufficiently senior to have broad personal historical perspective. 

 They were asked to avoid any consideration of the placement of specific 

 items of hardware in specific locations in a projected building, but 

 rather to concentrate on such broad questions as "What is the purpose 

 of an aerospace museum in the nation's capitol?" — "What sort of story 

 should it tell?" — and "To whom does it speak?" 



The results of this exercise are contained in a report entitled "Pro- 

 posed Objectives and Plans for the National Air and Space Museum," 

 dated January 15, 1965. The report was considered and approved 

 (with minor modifications) by the National Air Museum Advisory 



315 




316 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Board at its meeting on January 26, 1965. It was subsequently ap- 

 proved by the Secretary and now constitutes the basic planning docu- 

 ment for the future. A condensed version of this report was given wide 

 distribution through one of the publications of the Aerospace Industries 

 Association. 



The practice of seeking outside advice and assistance on museum 

 problems was followed throughout the year. Individuals and groups 

 knowledgeable and experienced in matters in which NAM is interested 

 (e.g., aero and space medicine, meteorology, flight safety, lighter-than- 

 air flight, etc.) were recruited to serve as advisers in developing useful 

 and accurate presentations for the new facility. A great deal of interest 

 in the museum has been engendered in this manner. It is evident that 

 there will be no lack of enthusiastic volunteer support for NAM 

 activities. 



In addition to such informal arrangements, contracts were made with 

 certain specialized consultants (1) to make a study of NAM's organiza- 

 tion and management problems in the preservation and restoration 

 division at Silver Hill, (2) to make preliminary studies of the organiza- 

 tion of our documentary and other research material, and (3) to advise 

 on matters relating to flight control displays and similar operations. 



Although, in the past, a certain number of space artifacts had been 

 collected and were on display, little in the way of space-oriented 

 programs or scientific or technological capability existed. To remedy 

 this difficulty, two major steps were undertaken. 



First, to alleviate the "space vacuum," an astronautics department 

 under the direction of Frederick C. Durant III was established. Mr. 

 Durant came into the museum in October 1964 as one of the members 

 of the planning group. He joined the staff as assistant director of 

 astronautics in January 1965. His long background and broad expe- 

 rience in rocketry and space technology have greatly strengthened 

 NAM's position. Under his direction a curatorial staff specializing in 

 space vehicle design, launch and propulsion technology, auxiliary sys- 

 tems development, and life support techniques will be developed. 



Second, close working relationships were established with NASA, 

 not only through the activities of NASA's Artifacts Committee 

 (which deals primarily with the disposition of important NASA- 

 developed hardware) but also with the scientific and technical staffs 

 of NASA. Administrator James Webb, Dr. Hugh Dryden, Dr. Robert 

 Seamans, and their associates supplied strong and continuing support 

 to NAM's plans and programs. In turn, NAM provided public 

 exhibition space for NASA displays of current interest. Concurrently 

 with the completion of such programs as the Gemini flights, the 

 Ranger Moon shots, and the Mariner Mars exploration, the associated 




NATIONAL AIR MUSEUM 317 



equipment, explanations of the programs, and the achieved results 

 were put on display in the rotunda and in the west hall of the Arts 

 and Industries Building. Public interest and NASA's favorable 

 reaction to these activities have been high. 



In addition to the establishment of a separate astronautics depart- 

 ment as mentioned above, the organic structure of the staff was re- 

 studied and lines of responsibility clarified. As now constituted, 

 five major departments exist: aeronautics, astronautics, information 

 and education, exhibits, and administration. 



As soon as conditions permit, an assistant director of aeronautics 

 (as an "opposite number" for Mr. Durant) will be selected. During 

 the year the work of the department was ably forwarded by the present 

 curatorial staff: Louis Casey for aircraft, Robert Meyer for power 

 plants and propulsion, and Kenneth Newland for auxiliary systems 

 and devices. 



The information and education department, headed by chief 

 historian Paul E. Garber, maintained a constant service to correspond- 

 ents and visitors in connection with their studies on flight and flight 

 technology. Steps were initiated to improve the sorting and cataloging 

 of the Museum's collection of research material. The services pro- 

 vided by Mr. Garber and his assistants contributed greatly to the 

 preparation of many articles for publication, television, and other 

 programs. Among his many activities, Mr. Garber gave 47 formal 

 lectures on various aspects of the history of flight, conducted 14 lecture 

 tours to museums, and participated in 6 radio and television programs. 



The exhibits department, under the direction of James Mahoney, 

 in addition to maintaining close and continuous contact with the 

 architects of the new facility, made considerable progress in temporarily 

 refurbishing certain of the older NAM exhibit areas. Recognizing 

 that NAM has an obligation to maintain acceptable exhibits for 

 public display during the interval before any new building is available, 

 several areas in the Arts and Industries Building (opened up by the 

 removal of exhibits to the Museum of History and Technology) are 

 being redeveloped for NAM's temporary use. These include the 

 southeast hall for display of aircraft and engines primarily for pri- 

 vate flying use, and the former power machinery hall for aerospace 

 art works, including paintings, drawings, and prints from our own col- 

 lections and on loan from NASA. As mentioned earlier, the west 

 hall has been in active use for temporary NASA displays of current 

 interest. 



Specimen preservation and restoration requirements for the preser- 

 vation and restoration division at Silver Hill were the subject of con- 

 siderable study and review in early 1965. The relationship between 




318 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



the curatorial staff and the division was clarified and codified. Under 

 Walter Male's direction, in spite of severe personnel limitations, work 

 progressed on the restoration of such major items as the NC-4 and 

 the Loeing Amphibian, previously scheduled. It is expected that the 

 studies now under way by consultants will provide a more stable base 

 for future programing of the work of the division. Meanwhile, a 

 complete inventorying and cataloging of all NAM specimens at Silver 

 Hill was accelerated during the midsummer of 1965. 



In the late spring of 1965 the first floor of the facility at 24th Street, 

 formerly occupied by the Museum of History and Technology was 

 turned over to the NAM exhibits department. The space was cleaned 

 and repainted and will be developed into an exhibits facility for the 

 Air Museum. The entire NAM collection of aircraft models was 

 moved into 24th Street to permit long-needed cataloging and evaluation 

 and also to make available more room at Silver Hill for preservation 

 and restoration work. 



Under funds appropriated by the Congress, the architectural and 

 engineering work on the new facility made excellent progress in the 

 past year. Close and frequent contact was maintained with the archi- 

 tects, Hellmuth, Obata & Kassabaum in St. Louis and their associates, 

 Mills, Petticord, & Mills in Washington. Gyo Obata was in active 

 personal charge of the project during the entire year. In the spring 

 he moved a part of his St. Louis design staff to Washington to facilitate 

 close cooperation with NAM and GSA. By the end of the year prac- 

 tically all major design problems were resolved, and the architect 

 reported that the complete construction drawings will be available by 

 the end of August 1965. Although Congress has not yet given final 

 approval of the project, planning work is going forward as rapidly as 

 time and personnel permit. The target date for completion of the new 

 Air and Space Museum is now estimated sometime during fiscal 1970, 

 and all budgeting is being drawn on that basis. 



Among the important staff-generated publications which appeared 

 during the year were the National Aeronautical Collections, 10th edition, by 

 Paul E. Garber, and the first two publications in the new Smithsonian 

 Annals of Flight series, The First Nonstop Coast-to-Coast Flight and the 

 Historic T-2 Airplane, by Louis S. Casey and The First Airplane Diesel 

 Engine: Packard Model DR-980 of 1928, by Robert B. Meyer. Several 

 other papers by staff personnel are in preparation. Also, the production 

 of a definitive biography of Samuel Pierpont Langley was started in 

 collaboration with the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory at 

 Cambridge. 




President Johnson seen viewing a model of the proposed new Air and Space 

 Museum. At left are S. Paul Johnston, Director of the Museum, and 

 Secretary Ripley. 






SkiSt'll 





~. \m v . 



A sketch of the interior of the proposed new Air and Space Museum. 



■■mmiHIIIIIIIIIIIIHI"""""" 





A model of the Smithsonian's proposed new Air and Space Museum showing 

 the main entrance facing the Mall. The Wright Brothers' plane can be 

 seen in the center background. 




NATIONAL AIR MUSEUM 319 



Accessions to the Museum, both in hardware and in research material, 

 are listed below. Special mention, however, should be made of certain 

 major items received in the past 12 months: 



Agena B Flight Test Vehicle, USAF 



Vertol VZ-2 Helicopter, AMG/USA 



McDonnell XHV-1 Gonvertiplane, USA 



Prototype Ion Thruster, Electro Optical Systems, Inc. 



Bell Model 30 Helicopter, Franklin Institute 



Laboratory Glassware — Ion Experiment, Mrs. Robert H. Goddard 



Besler Aero Steam Engine, Rear Admiral John K. Leydon 



SPIRE Inertial Guidance System, M.I.T. 



Prototype TIROS Satellite, NASA 



ACCESSIONS 



Additions to the National Aeronautical and Space Collections, re- 

 ceived and recorded during the fiscal year 1965, totaled 324 specimens 

 in 67 separate accessions, as listed below. Those from Government 

 departments are entered as transfers unless otherwise indicated; others 

 were received as gifts or loans. 



Air Forge, Department of the: Flight test vehicle (Agena B) (NAM 



1546). 

 Air Forge, Department of the (Monteith, Maj. Gen. D. O., 



Amarillo Air Force Base, Tex.): General Electric I-A Turbojet 



Engine (1942), first American-made jet engine (NAM 1503). 

 Air Forge, Department of the, Systems Command, Los Angeles, 



Calif.: Unmarked ball 16-inch diameter made of BSTM-B265/ 



58T. Outer shell oxidized. This specimen reentered atmosphere 



over Australia and is part of the Agena (NAM 1535). 

 Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington, D.C. : Cutaway 



of ejection seat and accessory components from an F-86A-5 aircraft 



(NAM 1497). 

 Army, Department of the, Army Materiel Command, Fort Eustis, 



Va.: Vertol VZ-2, S/N 56-6943, tilt-wing VTOL aircraft (NAM 



1536). 

 Army, Department of the, Director of Procurement, Washington, 



D.C: McDonnell XHV-1 convertiplane combining feature of 



fixed-wing and rotary-wing (NAM 1537). 

 Arnold, Maj. David L., Arlington, Va.: AAF summer uniform, 



worn during time immediately preceding death of Gen. H. H. 



Arnold (NAM 1549). 




320 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Basford, G. M., Co., New York, N. Y.: Cutaway model of Hensoldt 

 binoculars, similar to those used by John Glenn on his space 

 flight (NAM 1494). 



Brichagek, J. F., Euclid, Ohio: Model of 1914 Burgess-Dunne 

 hydroplane -swept wing biplane, 1: 16 size (NAM 1540). 



Cochran, Jacqueline, New York, N Y.: One medal and two 

 awards given to the donor for outstanding achievements in aviation 

 (NAM 1490). 



Dickson, Sidney H., Easton, Md.: World War I, fleece-lined leather 

 flying boots, purported to have been used by Col. William Thaw 

 (NAM 1493). 



Doolittle, Gen. James H., Redondo Beach, Calif. : Bronze Antarctica 

 Service Medal presented to donor by U.S. Navy (NAM 1517). 



Electro Optical Systems, Inc., Pasadena, Calif.: Ion Thruster, 

 marked with label reading "in part developed by Dr. A. T. For- 

 rester, Electro Optical Systems, Inc." This specimen is operational 

 duplicate of Thruster used in suborbital shot (NAM 1545). 



Exchange Club, Meridian, Miss.: Curtiss P-40E fighter WW II 

 (NAM 1506). 



Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, Pa.: Bell model 30 helicopter 

 (NAM 1504). 



General Dynamics, Fort Worth, Tex. Desk model approximately 

 1:80 size of the Convair F 111 A. Model has variable swept 

 wing (NAM 1541). 



General Services Administration, Washington D.C. : LR-79 Rocket 

 Engine (NAM 1534). 



Georgetown Cabinet & Finishing Co., Inc., Washington, D.C: 

 Model of Vlaicu monoplane (1910) (NAM 1498). 



General Motors Corp., AC Electronics Division, Milwaukee, 

 Wis.: An incomplete inertial guidance system for a Thor rocket 

 booster, plus nose cone and first station of Thor (NAM 1526). 



Goddard, Mrs. Robert H., Worcester, Mass.: Equipment used 

 to test the flash visibility range of several mixtures of metal powders 

 (NAM 1552). Suitcase used by Dr. Robert H. Goddard (NAM 

 1551). Glassware used by/or under the supervision of Dr. Goddard 

 in experimental investigations of the behavior of ions (NAM 1550). 



Goodrich, B. F. Co., Washington, D.C: Polaris rocket chamber 

 (sectionalized) showing filament winding technique (NAM 1553). 



Hamilton, R. B., Jr., Baltimore, Md. : Wright airplane stabilizer parts, 

 1913; exact-scale reproductions of the impeller and pendulum 

 units (Contract) (NAM 1527). 




NATIONAL AIR MUSEUM 321 



Hammersley, Col. Howard, Jr., Roanoke, Va.: AAF summer 



flight suit used in Mediterranean theater of operations during 



World War II (NAM 1548). 

 Hartwigk, Herbert D., Cayucos, Calif.: Model of 1914 Burgess 



flying boat, 1:16 size; model of Curtiss N, circa 1913-14, Trainer; 



1:16 size; model of the Wright B-l, circa 1912, U.S. Navy Air- 

 craft, 1 :16 size (NAM 1519). 

 Institute of Aeronautical Science, New York, N. Y.: A periodic 



compass, World War I, German. Designed for use in aircraft 



(NAM 1495). 

 Leydon, Rear Adm. John K., Washington, D.C.: Besler aeronautical 



steam engine of 1956 (120 h.p.) designed to power Fairchild M 224, 



four-engine airplane (NAM 1514). 

 Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Burbank, Calif.: Wing section to illus- 

 trate the thermal deicing system of aircraft wings (NAM 1539). 

 Lockheed-Georgia Co., Marietta, Ga.: Lockheed Jetstar Corp. 



transport, 1:16 size, circa 1964 (NAM 1522). 

 Lowe A. W., St. Louis, Mo.: Early type of static-line parachute 



(NAM 1509). 

 Macdowell, Karl P., Fairfax, Va.: 1928 airline ticket for trip, 



London to Paris, issued to donor (NAM 1508). 

 Massachusettes Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.: 



SPIRE inertial guidance system used on the first successful inertially 



guided transcontinental flight, Feb. 8, 1953 (NAM 1511). 

 Matt, Paul R., Temple City, Calif., Model of Curtiss HA fighter, 



circa 1919; first Navy fighter type (NAM 1516). 

 Mcdonnell Aircraft Corp., St. Louis, Mo.: One-third scale model 



of Gemini spacecraft. This model represents the spacecraft which 



will be used in the U.S. Manned-Space Program (NAM 1513). 

 Mikesh, Mat. Robert C, San Francisco, Calif.: Model of Douglas 



DST bearing registration and livery of first of DC-3 production 



series (NAM 1523). 

 Mohawk Airlines, Utica, N. Y.: Nine scale models representing 



aircraft used by Mohawk Airlines (NAM 1554). 

 National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, 



D.C.: Prototype satellite Tiros, one of original five such craft 

 built. Basic configuration that of Tiros II (NAM 1544). 

 National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Flight Research 



Center, Edwards, Calif. : Model North American X-l 5-3, model 



1 : 16 size S/N 66672 (NAM 1518). 

 Navy, Department of the (Marine Corps School, U.S.), Quantico, 



Va.: Japanese copy of a Type 92, 7.7 mm. Lewis machinegun for 

 aircraft (NAM 1525). 



780-427—66 33 




322 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Navy, Department of the, Lakehurst, N. J.: Wooden propeller 

 (NAM 1524). 



Navy, Department of the, Mechanigsburg, Pa.: A collection of 

 Japanese and German World War II aircraft instruments (NAM 

 1502). 



Navy, Department of the, Bureau of Naval Weapons, Washing- 

 ton, D.G.: Michell-crankless aeronautical engine, 12 cylinder, 

 liquid-cooled barrel, approximately 200 h.p. at 2,000 r.p.m. (NAM 

 1538). 



Neumann, C, Tulsa, Okla.: Collection of early airborne radio and 

 radar equipment plus descriptive manuals (NAM 1492). 



Northwest Airlines, Minneapolis, Minn.: Scale model of DC-8 

 transport (NAM 1529). 



Opsahl, Alvin B., Minneapolis, Minn. : Wright J 4-B engine built 

 April 2, 1926 by Wright Aeronautical Corp. (NAM 1528). 



Patent Office, U.S., Washington, D.C.: Patent model in support of 

 patent claim for R. J. Spaulding Flying Machine, Mar. 5, 1889, 

 patent no. 398984 (NAM 1521). 



Patterson, Mr. & Mrs. Jefferson, Washington, D.C.: Military 

 uniform belonging to 1st Lt. Frank Stuart Patterson (1918) in whose 

 honor Patterson Field (later Wright- Patterson AFB, Dayton, Ohio) 

 was named (NAM 1499). 



Perkin-Elmer Corporation, Norwalk, Conn.: 1:16 scale model of 

 the Stratoscope II telescope used in high altitude experimental 

 telescopic photography (NAM 1500). 



Piasecki, Frank, Philadelphia, Pa.: Piasecki PV2, 3-blade rotor 

 helicopter (NAM 1505). 



Robertson, Clifford, St. Petersburg, Fla.: Portion of fabric from 

 the French airplane "Question Mark," which made first Paris to 

 New York flight, autographed by pilots Coste and Bellonte (NAM 

 1547). 



Ryan, Prof. James J., St. Paul, Minn.: Ryan Flight Recorder Exhibit 

 unit which contains the components of the Recorder, showing its 

 development and uses (NAM 1507). 



Scale Craft Models, Massillon, Ohio: Model 1:16 size of Fabre 

 Hydro "Avion" Canard 1910 first hydroaircraft; Curtiss "Tan- 

 ager" — Winner of Guggenheim Safe Flight Contest (1929) 1:16 

 size; and model of Wright Model "F," 1:16 size (NAM 1543). 



Schoenberg, Mr., Long Island, N.Y.: 1:4 size model of a New 

 Standard D-25A "Pride of Patterson" and a Curtiss-Reed propel- 

 ler, circa 1925 (NAM 1489). 




NATIONAL AIR MUSEUM 323 



Smith, J. C, Massillon, Ohio: Lockheed XC-35 aircraft, 1:16 size 

 model of first transport airplane with pressurized cabin (NAM 

 1520). 



Smithsonian Institution, Unknown: Model 1 :49 size of North Ameri- 

 can F-100G Super Sabre aircraft (NAM 1515). 



Smithsonian Institution, Found in NAM Collection: Small brass 

 fitting, check valve; attributed to Robert Goddard (NAM 1530). 

 Nose cone of small rocket with ejection mechanism attributed to 

 Robert Goddard (NAM 1531). Tail section of small rocket attrib- 

 uted to Robert Goddard (NAM 1532). Five pairs of World War 

 I radio headsets (NAM 1496). Four pairs of World War I, U.S. 

 Army radio earphones |(NAM .1501). Life-size painting of Maj. 

 Gen. George O. Squier (NAM 1491). 



Sperry Gyroscope Co., Division of Sperry-Rand Corp., Great 

 Neck, N.Y. : A collection of 60 early aircraft instruments, most of 

 which were developed and manufactured by the Sperry Gyroscope 

 Co. (NAM 1488). 



Vaeth, J. Gordon, Washington, D.C. : Copy of first Tiros Nephanaly- 

 sis (cloud map) signed by James B. Jones and J. H. Conover (NAM 

 1533). 



Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, Va.: J44-R-12 Fair- 

 child cutaway turbojet engine (1952-59) (NAM 1512). 



Waterman, Waldo, San Diego, Calif.: Full-size reproduction of the 

 1909 Popular Mechanics glider (NAM 1542). 



Willis, J. L., Sydney, Australia: Two fine examples of native-made 

 Australian boomerangs (NAM 1510). 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



The cooperation of the following persons and organizations in 

 providing reference materials for the Museum's Historical Flight 

 Research Center is sincerely appreciated and acknowledged: 



Air Force, U.S., Wright-Patterson Bagley, J. A., Farnborough, Hants, 



AFB, Ohio. England. 



Air Force, U.S. Kelly AFB, Texas. Bell Aerosystems Company, Buffalo, 

 All-Woman Transcontinental Air N.Y. 



Race, Inc., Teterboro, N.J. Boeing Co., Seatde, Wash. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Bradford, R. W., Don Mills, Ontario, 



Astronautics, New York, N.Y. Canada. 



Aviation Week and Space Tech- Bronte, Emory B., Honolulu, Hawaii. 



nology, New York, N.Y. Brunner, Calyton J., Troy, Ohio. 




324 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Campbell, Mark (estate of) through 



Kenn C. Rust) Glendale, Calif. 

 Cathcart, Donald G., Hermosa Beach, 



Calif. 

 Chamberlain, Ralph G., Lincoln 



Park, Mich. 

 Coast Guard, U.S., Washington, D.C. 

 Coombs, Charles I., Los Angeles, 



Calif. 

 Experimental Aircraft Association, 



Hales Corners, Wis. 

 Fahey, James C, Falls Church, Va. 

 Federal Aviation Agency, Washing- 

 ton, D.C. 

 General Dynamics/Fort Worth, Fort 



Worth, Tex. 

 Gratz, Charles Murray, Greenwich, 



Conn. 

 Hart, John T. (through William 



MacCracken), St. Louis, Mo. 

 Herr, Otto, Hanover, Germany. 

 Hodous, Mrs. Charles J., Jr., Fairview 



Park, Ohio. 

 Holt, Ken, Washington, D.C. 

 Hooper, Harold, Vienna, Va. 

 Hunsaker, Dr. J. C, Cambridge, 



Mass. 

 Hutchinson, Capt. J. D., Denver, 



Colo. 

 Jacobs, Col. Stanley F., USAF Ret., 



Arlington, Va. 

 Kaman Aircraft Corp., Bloomfield, 



Conn. 

 Kines, Ronald L., Hyattsville, Md. 

 Knell, K. A., Cambridge, England. 

 Koster, William C, Evanston, 111. 

 Kulp, Mrs. Jeanne, Reisterstown, 



Md. 

 Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Burbank, 



Calif. 

 Lea, John, Washington, D.C. 



Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Washing- 

 ton, D.C. 



Lazarus, William C. (thru A. B. 

 McMullen), Washington, D.C. 



Marshall, Mrs. Shirley, Tucson, Ariz. 



Matt, Paul R., Temple City, Calif. 



Merkle, Gustave John, Greenbelt, 

 Md. 



Messer, Glenn E., Birmingham, Ala. 



Meyer, Jerome B., Ormond Beach, 

 Fla. 



Murray, J. J., West Hollywood, 

 Calif. 



National Aeronautics and Space Ad- 

 ministration, Goddard Space 

 Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. 



National Aeronautics and Space Ad- 

 ministration Washington, D.C. 



Navy, U.S., Washington, D.C. 



Navy, U.S., Philadelphia, Pa. 



Ninety Nines, Inc., El Paso, Tex. 



North American Aviation, Inc., 

 Washington, D.C. 



Nye, Willis L., Hay ward, Calif. 



New York Port Authority, New York, 

 N.Y. 



Rolls-Royce, Ltd., Derby, England. 



Shell Companies Foundation, Inc., 

 New York, N.Y. 



Sivel, Dr. W., San Francisco, Calif. 



Smith, Mrs. Joan Merriman, Long 

 Beach, Calif. 



Stearns, Raymond L., Raleigh, N.C. 



Thompson Ramo Wooldridge, Inc., 

 Cleveland, Ohio. 



Townson, George, Meadowbrook, Pa. 



Turner, Thomas, Washington, D.C. 



Wigton, Don C, Detroit, Mich. 



Williams, Warren W., Douglasville, 

 Pa. 



United Air Lines, Chicago, 111. 



Philip S. Hopkins, director of the National Air Museum since 1958, 

 whose efforts during the past few years laid the groundwork for the 

 magnificent new NASM facility-to-be, retired as of August 1, 1964. 

 Paul E. Garber served as acting director for the month of August 

 and the present incumbent took office on September 1, 1964. 




John F. Kennedy Center for the 

 Performing Arts 







John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts 



Roger L. Stevens 

 Chairman, Board of Trustees 



The past 12 months have seen greater strides toward the creation of 

 the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts than any previous 

 period since inception of the original idea. Funds have been raised to 

 match the full Federal appropriation. The ground-breaking has taken 

 place. The Metropolitan Opera National Company, jointly spon- 

 sored and underwritten by the Center and the Metropolitan Opera 

 Association, is a reality. Final architectural plans are being prepared, 

 and the letting of contracts will begin in September. A year from now 

 the superstructure of the Center should be rising on the banks of the 

 Potomac. It is a year in which the Center has graduated from the 

 realm of hopes, plans, and dreams to actuality, detail, and promise. 



ORGANIZATION 



The National Cultural Center was established by an Act of Congress 

 in September 1958. This Act which terminated in 5 years was ex- 

 tended for 3 more years until September 1966, and specified that the 

 money for the Center's construction must be raised by voluntary 

 contributions. Congress authorized a nationwide fund-raising 

 campaign for this purpose. 



Following the death of President Kennedy there was a spontaneous 

 movement throughout the country to make the Cultural Center, in 

 which he had taken such a close personal interest, his sole official 

 memorial in the Nation's capital. President Johnson sent an Admin- 

 istration request to Congress in December 1963; the measure was 

 passed with full bipartisan support and signed into law by the President 

 on January 23, 1964 (Public Law 88-260). 



Under the bylaws of this Act, and pursuant thereto, the Board of 

 Trustees have held three meetings during the past 12 months, and the 

 members of the Executive Committee met five times during the same 

 period. 



327 




328 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS 



Board of Trustees 



At the present time the membership of the Board of Trustees of the 

 John F. Kennedy Center is as follows: 



Richard Adler* 

 Howard F. Ahmanson 

 Floyd D. Akers 

 Robert O. Anderson + * 

 Ralph E. Becker + 

 K. LeMoyne Billings + 

 Mrs. Thomas W. Braden* 

 Ernest R. Breech 

 Edgar M. Bronfman 

 Mrs. George R. Brown* 

 Ralph J. Bunche 

 Anthony J. Celebrezze 

 Joseph S. Clark 

 Abe Fortas* 

 J. William Fulbright 

 Mrs. George A. Garrett 

 Leonard H. Goldenson* 

 George B. Hartzog, Jr. + 

 Mrs. John F. Kennedy -f- 

 Robert F. Kennedy +* 

 Francis Keppel 

 Mrs. Albert D. Lasker + 

 Erich Leinsdorf+* 



Sol M. Linowilz+* 

 Harry C. McPherson, Jr.+* 

 George Meany 

 L. Quincy Mumford 

 Edwin W. Pauley* 

 Arthur Penn* 

 Mrs. Charlotte T. Reid 

 Richard S. Reynolds, Jr. 

 Frank H. Ricketson, Jr. 

 S. Dillon Ripley, 11 + 

 Richard Rodgers* 

 Leverett Saltonstall 

 Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.* 

 Mrs. Jouett Shouse-f- 

 Mrs. Jean Kennedy Smith* 

 Roger L. Stevens + 

 Frank Thompson, Jr. 

 Walter N. Tobriner + 

 William Walton + 

 William H. Waters, Jr. 

 Edwin L. Weisl, Sr.* 

 Robert W. Woodruff* 

 James C. Wright, Jr. 



Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, Mrs. John F. Kennedy 

 and Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower continue to 

 serve as honorary cochairmen of the Center 



The elected officers of the Center are as follows: 



Roger L. Stevens, chairman 

 Robert O. Anderson, vice chairman 

 Sol M. Linowitz, vice chairman 

 Ralph E. Becker, general counsel 

 Daniel W. Bell, treasurer 

 K. LeMoyne Billings, secretary 



Philip J. Mullin, assistant secretary 



and administrative officer 

 Herbert D. Lawson, assistant treasurer 

 Kenneth Birgfeld, assistant treasurer 

 Paul Seltzer, assistant treasurer 

 L. Corrin Strong, chairman emeritus 



*Denotes a new member appointed by the President since June 30, 1964 

 + Denotes a member of the Executive Committee 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 329 



JFK Center/GSA Liaison Committee 



The General Services Administration is serving as the Center's 

 agent for design and construction. The JFK Center/GSA Liaison 

 Committee was formed to work on final plans and specifications 

 and all future phases of building the Center. It held 18 meetings 

 throughout the fiscal year. These meetings bring together represent- 

 atives of the Center, General Services Administration, and the archi- 

 tect and make determinations with respect to planning, contracting, 

 and construction. The committee also serves as a coordinating 

 group among the various agencies of the Government having inci- 

 dental interest or jurisdiction in the planning and construction of 

 the project. This includes the government of the District of Colum- 

 bia, the National Park Service, and the various security and police 

 jurisdictions. 



In addition to Mr. Stevens, chairman ex officio, trustees and offi- 

 cers of the Center serving on the committee are : 



Ralph E. Becker, general counsel 



Mrs. Jouett Shouse 



S. Dillon Ripley 



George B. Hartzog, Jr. 



Philip J. Mullin, administrative officer 



Program Committee 



Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., was appointed chairman of the Center's 

 Program Committee. Serving with him will be Mrs. Thomas W. 

 Braden, Harold Clurman, Richard N. Goodwin, August Heckscher, 

 Mrs. John F. Kennedy, Senator Robert F. Kennedy, Goddard 

 Lieberson, Oliver Smith, and George Stevens, Jr. The Program 

 Committee will make recommendations for the maximum effective 

 use of the Center's facilities to comply with the law and the intent 

 of the Congress and will also suggest candidates for the position of 

 program director as well as guidelines respecting the duties of this 

 office. The Board of Trustees in turn will act on these recommen- 

 dations and define the policy with respect to the Center's operations. 



Memorial Committee 



The John F. Kennedy Center Memorial Committee, responsible 

 for selecting a suitable and appropriate memorial to President Kennedy 

 for inclusion within the Center complex, has met and has made a 

 preliminary report on its recommendations to the trustees. 




330 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Fine Arts Accessions Committee 



The Fine Arts Accessions Committee appointed a subcommittee 

 to assist it in preliminary consideration and screening of all works 

 of art offered to the Center. The subcommittee is made up of leading 

 authorities in the fine arts residing in the Washington area. Serving 

 on the subcommittee are: David W. Scott, National Collection of 

 Fine Arts, as chairman; J. Carter Brown, National Gallery of Art; 

 Mrs. Marjorie Phillips, The Phillips Gallery; Edward Durell Stone; 

 Hermann W. Williams, Jr., Corcoran Gallery of Art; and Karel Yasko, 

 General Services Administration. The list of gifts tendered and offi- 

 cially accepted thus far (not including those from foreign governments) 

 comprise the following items: 



Portrait of President Kennedy by Carlos Andreson. Gift of the artist. 



Stein way grand piano. Gift of Mrs. Edward Sloane. 



Mural painting by Mark Rothko. Gift of Mrs. Albert Lasker. 



Japanese BYOBU folding two-panel screen. Gift of a group of 

 Japanese ladies. 



Recording of Enesco's 1st and 2d Rumanian rhapsodies conducted 

 by the composer. Gift of Donald H. Gabor. 



PROGRESS IN FUND RAISING 



As of June 30, 1965, pledges and contributions to the John F. Ken- 

 nedy Center for the Performing Arts exceeded $15.5 million — the 

 amount necessary to qualify for the full matching Federal grant. 

 Included in that sum was a gift of S500,000 from the Joseph P. Kennedy, 

 Jr., Foundation and a $5-million grant from the Ford Foundation 

 which had been contingent on two-to-one matching terms as originally 

 stipulated in April 1964. 



Land Gift 



The two daughters and the son of the late Mr. and Mrs. Christian 

 Heurich, Sr., deeded to the Center, as a gift, a plot of land appraised 

 at $150,000. It is situated within the boundaries of the Center's 

 site. This gift, which was made in memory of Mr. and Mrs. Heurich, 

 Sr., completed the acquisition of their property without the necessity 

 for any condemnation action by the National Capital Planning 

 Commission. 




kennedy center for the performing arts 331 



Foreign Gifts 



In addition to the previously reported gifts of marble from the 

 Italian Government and a Waterford chandelier from Ireland, four 

 other foreign governments have made contributions to the Center 

 in the past year. The Danish Government agreed to supply the 

 furniture valued at $155,000 for the Grand Foyer. The West German 

 Government will donate sculptured bronze panels for the entrance of 

 the Center with a minimum value of $250,000. A magnificent hand- 

 woven red silk curtain, accented with gold, will hang from the proscen- 

 ium of the Opera House as a joint gift from the Government of 

 Japan and the America-Japan Society of Tokyo. Because of the time 

 and skills required, the donors expect the cost to exceed $140,000. 

 Twelve crystal chandeliers, designed by the noted Norwegian glass 

 designer Jonas Hidle, will enhance the Concert Hall as Norway's 

 contribution to the Center. The architect estimates that to procure 

 or duplicate this gift which is being fabricated by the Christiania 

 Glasmagasin, near Oslo, would cost in excess of $15,000 each. 



Development Committee 



With Robert O. Anderson as chairman, the Development Com- 

 mittee will continue to prevail upon the trustees to assist the Center 

 through their own individual gifts and by additional solicitation of 

 foundations and individuals for major contributions. In addition, 

 approaches to and from foreign governments will be further pursued. 



The Washington Area Special Gifts Committee and its subcommit- 

 tees, having completed their work, ceased operation as a fund-raising 

 adjunct of the Center. 



Washington Committee Theater Seat Priority Plan 



A maximum of 100 seats, at $3,000 each, will be allocated in the 

 theater for sale by the Washington Committee under the Theater 

 Seat Priority Plan. Each endowment will include priority privileges 

 for opening-night performances for a period of 25 years. To become 

 effective a minimum of 80 seats had to be sold. This number has 

 already been subscribed. 



Seat Endowment Plan 



To date, 30 boxes and 270 seats have been officially designated by 

 donors in the Center. A considerable amount of funds remains in 

 the reserve account awaiting final disposition. 




332 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Sousa Memorial 



Orginally conceived in the form of a band shell to be erected on 

 the roof terrace, this endowment, owing to changes in the utilization 

 of the roof area, will provide the stage and acoustical sound reflectors 

 in the Concert Hall. An appropriate plaque will designate this as 

 a gift in the name of John Philip Sousa from John Philip Sousa Memo- 

 rial, Inc. This group is made up largely of high school and college 

 band masters whose bands are presenting concerts and other musical 

 events: the proceeds from these events are being contributed toward 

 the fulfillment of their $100,000 pledge. Nearly half of the pledged 

 amount has been received by the Center. Bands and orchestras 

 participating will be appropriately recognized by inscription on the 

 memorial plaque. 



Gifts of Materials 



Interest has been shown by several domestic industries in supplying 

 American-produced materials as gifts to the Center. The Reynolds 

 Metals Co. has donated aluminum ingots valued at $75,000 which 

 will be fabricated to meet the specifications of the architect. The 

 Martin Marietta Corp. has given the Center 13,000 barrels of cement, 

 which reduces the amount required for purchase in the building con- 

 tract by more than $50,000. It is possible that other gifts of this type 

 will be received before the invitations to bid go out to the general 

 contractors. 



Future Needs 



With the monies obtained from public contributions, the Federal 

 grant, and the Treasury bonds, there are, according to the General 

 Services Administration, sufficient funds on hand to proceed with the 

 construction of the Center. However, it should be recalled that in 

 the John F. Kennedy Center Act (Public Law 88-260), Congress 

 stated that the Center shall, among other activities, "develop programs 

 for children and youth and elderly (and for other age groups as well) 

 in such arts designed specifically for their participation, education 

 and recreation." No previous provision has been made for the finan- 

 cial support of such activities. In view of this the trustees have dis- 

 cussed the need and plans for a program development fund to insure 

 that the mandate of Congress will be appropriately and fully realized. 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 333 



ARCHITECTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 



Studio Film Theater 



Final drawings are about complete for the 500-seat Studio Film 

 Theater to be located on the roof of the Center above the 1,100-seat 

 main theater. Proscenium-type screen facilities will provide for the 

 projection of 16 mm., 35 mm., and 70 mm. motion pictures while the 

 theater also will be available for dramatic offerings, concerts, dance 

 recitals, and lectures. When desirable or appropriate, this auditorium 

 can also be converted into a theater-in-the -round. 



Further Refinements 



Although the shape of the Opera House has been altered, it still 

 maintains the circular effect originally envisioned. 



The Concert Hall now is in a rectangular form in the interest of 

 better acoustics. Provision also has been made for the installation of 

 an Aeolian-Skinner concert organ which was given to the Center by 

 Mrs. Jouett Shouse. It has been designed for use either as a solo 

 instrument or as part of an orchestra. 



In the theater more balcony seats have been added and some orches- 

 tra seats removed to provide a more intimate atmosphere. 



There also will be a 200-seat tourist center and cinema on the ground 

 level for the showing of documentary films and for orientation sessions 

 in conjunction with tours of the Center. 



Land Developments 



Steps have been initiated for the condemnation of the Watergate 

 Inn and surrounding area. 



On the property adjacent to the site of the Center there is under 

 construction a project known as the Watergate Towne Development. 

 Four buildings are contemplated in this undertaking and it is known 

 that Building No. 1, which is designated as stage 4 of the development, 

 will rise to a height 41 feet above the main roof of the Center. As long 

 ago as last November 25, 1964, the Center's general counsel went on 

 record before the Board of Zoning Appeals to express the trustees' 

 opposition to the proposed height of this building. Thus far the Board 

 has not handed down a ruling on this matter. The developer of the 




334 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Watergate project, however, indicated no intention of altering his 

 blueprints. It was, therefore, resolved by the trustees that the officers 

 and general counsel of the Center take all legal measures to oppose 

 vigorously the construction of Building No. 1 to any height not sub- 

 stantially below the cornice line of the Kennedy Center. 



Development of the Site 



On May 8, 1964, the National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC) 

 which is the central planning agency for the Federal and District of 

 Columbia Governments, reaffirmed its approval of the site. On July 

 23, 1964, the National Capital Planning Commission approved the 

 site plan in lieu of zoning. These latter actions were taken after ex- 

 tensive study by a task force composed of representatives of the NCPC, 

 the General Services Administration, the National Park Service, the 

 District of Columbia Department of Highways and Traffic, and the 

 Center's architect. 



Consultants 



To assure that the Center will have the benefit of the finest technical 

 knowledge and experience in the many diverse fields connected with 

 the performing arts, the architect and General Services Administration 

 have made extensive use of consultants. Specialists in lighting, seating, 

 acoustics, audiovisual equipment, stage design and equipment, and 

 theater planning have been retained. Working together they will af- 

 ford the Center the finest technical competence available in all phases 

 of opera, musical comedy, drama, ballet, symphony orchestra, and 

 motion picture presentations. 



Included in the list are two of the Nation's leading acoustical ex- 

 perts — they have been consulting, advising, and working closely with 

 the architect, General Services Administration, and the Center to 

 insure that the acoustical characteristics of the Kennedy Center will 

 be the finest and most nearly perfect of any of the performing-arts 

 halls in the world. 



Restaurant Facilities 



A 10-year agreement was entered into with the Restaurant 

 Management Division of Automatic Canteen Company of America to 

 cover the operation of all restaurant facilities in the Center. Auto- 

 matic Canteen has recently designed the Metropolitan Opera's new 

 facilities at Lincoln Center. They will be responsible for catering and 




Architect's model of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, 

 showing the facade facing the Potomac River. 



Architect's conception of the entrance plaza of the John F. Kennedy Center for 

 the Performing Arts in the Nation's Capital. 




Model of the grand foyer for the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 335 



servicing the main restaurant which will seat approximately 275 per- 

 sons, a dual-purpose cafeteria/buffet seating approximately 245, and 

 a coffee shop with a capacity of about 100 persons. In addition, there 

 will be other refreshment areas in the Grand Foyer. Income accruing 

 to the Center from this contract is expected to be sizable. 



Construction Schedule 



The architect reported that his final plans would be ready by Sep- 

 tember 30. It will then take approximately 8 weeks for General 

 Services Administration to review the plans and prepare the necessary 

 documents for bidding. Thus, it would be about December 15, 1965, 

 before the bids will have been received and evaluated. Prior to that 

 time demolition of all remaining buildings on the site will have been 

 completed and the necessary relocation of Rock Creek Parkway should 

 be finished. 



SPECIAL EVENTS 



Ground-Breaking Ceremony 



At noon on December 2, 1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson broke 

 ground for the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts 

 before an audience of more than 1,000 persons, including members 

 of the Kennedy family, the Congress, the Diplomatic Corps, the Supreme 

 Court, the Cabinet, the Center's trustees, and distinguished perform- 

 ing artists. The program for the ceremony included the following: 



Invocation by the Most Reverend Philip Hannan, Auxiliary Bishop 

 of Washington. 



Introduction by the Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Sir John 

 Gielgud who delivered a passage from Shakespeare's Henry V. 



A hymn by the choral group of the U.S. Navy Band. 



The reading by Jason Robards, Jr., of quotations from the speeches by 

 President Kennedy concerning the arts. 



Remarks by Senator-elect Robert F. Kennedy. 



Address by the President of the United States. 



Swearing in of the Center's new trustees by Justice White of the 

 Supreme Court. 




336 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Following the ceremony a luncheon was held in the diplomatic 

 reception rooms of the State Department for some 400 distinguished 

 guests. Speakers at the luncheon were Vice President-elect Humphrey, 

 Edward Durell Stone, and Roger L. Stevens. 



John F. Kennedy Center-Metropolitan Opera 

 National Company 



As an indication of his great and personal interest in the project, 

 President Kennedy himself announced, at the White House on October 

 11, 1963, the formation of the Metropolitan Opera National Company 

 under the joint auspices of the Metropolitan Opera Association and the 

 Center. At that time he fully endorsed the purpose of the Company 

 to "fill a long-felt need in our musical life . . . (and to) . . . give 

 opportunity to the young talent with which this country abounds." 



It was of increasing concern to the trustees of the Center that during 

 the period of planning and construction it was vitally necessary to 

 emphasize and give active affirmation to the national character of the 

 Center. The Metropolitan Opera Association's concept of a truly na- 

 tional opera company that would bring this art form to cities and 

 citizens throughout this land seemed to present an ideal and timely 

 project for furtherance of the trustees' efforts in this direction. 



Not only does the Company fulfill a specific provision of our Congres- 

 sional mandate— to present classical and contemporary opera — 'but it 

 also provides simultaneously a means of training and participation for 

 talented young Americans. It seems particularly fitting that this first 

 presentation under the cosponsorship of the Center should be one that 

 was so close to the late President to whom the Center is a memorial. 



In the middle of July the Company is scheduled to assemble on the 

 campus of Butler University in Indianapolis, Ind., for an intensive 

 8-week rehearsal period prior to launching their first nationwide tour 

 on September 20 at Clowes Memorial Hall in Indianapolis. Their 

 season will extend through May 1966 and include some 70 North 

 American cities. 



(On the evening of May 3, 1965, the Metropolitan Opera National 

 Company appeared in the Department of State Auditorium as part of 

 a series of Cabinet presentations.) 




kennedy center for the performing arts 337 



New York World's Fair 



One of the new exhibits in the Federal Pavilion at the 1965 New 

 York World's Fair is a handsome display of the John F. Kennedy Center 

 for the Performing Arts in which a model of the Center is the highlight. 

 Surrounding it are color enlargements of interior and exterior photo- 

 graphs of the model together with quotations from President Kennedy's 

 speeches concerning the importance of the arts in our society as well 

 as pertinent statements of President Johnson. This exhibit is located 

 at the end of the panoramic ride in the Federal Pavilion which last 

 year had 5% million visitors. 



THE FUTURE 



Never before in the history of the Nation's capital have the prospects 

 for a truly national center for the performing arts looked as bright as 

 they do today. From incoming mail, press comments, and general 

 interest expressed in numerous ways, the country at large is aware of, 

 in support of, and eager for the reality of the Kennedy Center. We 

 have successfully hurdled the two initial stages: the preparation of firm 

 and detailed groundwork and planning; and, the conclusion of the 

 campaign to secure the necessary funds for construction. Ahead of us 

 lies the construction itself and then utilization of the Center's facilities 

 in compliance with the mandate of Congress. In the ensuing 12 

 months major strides should be made in the building of the Center and 

 progress will continue in planning for its projected operations. 



Finally, it cannot be stressed too greatly that the development of the 

 Center to the stage herein described would not have been possible 

 without the unceasing support and encouragement that has been 

 received from the Smithsonian Institution, the General Services Admin- 

 istration, the many other Government agencies who have been at all 

 times helpful and understanding, the members of Congress whose faith 

 and trust in our undertaking have eased many burdens and problems, 

 all of the members of President Kennedy's family whose active interest 

 has been a constant source of inspiration, and the enthusiasm and 

 support of President and Mrs. Johnson. 



789-427—06 34 




338 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



FINANCIAL REPORT, JULY 1, 1964, THROUGH 

 JUNE 30, 1965 



July 28, 7965 

 To the Board of Trustees of the 

 John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts 

 Washington, D.C. 



Gentlemen: 



We have examined the books and records of the JOHN F. KENNEDY 

 CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS for the period July 1, 1964, 

 through June 30, 1965, and submit our report herewith as follows: 

 Exhibit A — Balance Sheet as of June 30, 1965. 

 Exhibit B — Statement of Income, Expenses and Fund Balance for the 



Year July 1, 1964 Through June 30, 1965. 

 Exhibit B-I — Statement of Expenses for the Year July 1, 1964 Through 

 June 30, 1965. 

 Our examination was made in accordance with generally accepted auditing 

 standards and accordingly included such tests of the accounting records and 

 such other auditing procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. 

 In our opinion the accompanying report presents fairly the financial position 

 of the JOHN F. KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 

 at June 30, 1965 and the results of its operation for the period then ended in 

 conformity with generally accepted accounting principles. 

 Respectfully submitted, 



(S) John J. Addabo 

 Certified Public Accountant 



EXHIBIT A 



BALANCE SHEET, JUNE 30, 1965 

 ASSETS 



CURRENT ASSETS 



Cash in banks 

 General accounts . $2,146,615.19 

 Time deposits 



and savings 



accounts 10,015,320.77 $12,161,935.96 



Notes receivable — due within one 



year 125, 000. 00 



Accounts receivable 9, 219. 18 



Accrued interest receivable 164, 369. 20 



Petty cash fund 400. 00 



Deposit with airline 425. 00 



Stock, bonds, and property re- 

 ceived 268,659.00 $12,730,008.34 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 339 



PLEDGES RECEIVABLE 



National General Account $10, 000. 00 



National Seat Reserve Account 600. 00 



President's Business Committee 26, 500. 00 



Washington Area Building Fund — 

 General 6, 100. 00 



Washington Area Building Fund — 

 Reserve 10, 523. 17 



Washington Area Seat Reserve Ac- 

 count 5, 350. 00 



Washington Area Federal Employee 

 Drive 1,884.50 



Washington Area Federal Employee 

 Drive — Seat Endowment 45. 00 



Washington Area Tangible Property . 35, 000. 00 $96, 002. 67 



REAL ESTATE FIXED ASSETS AND OTHER 

 TANGIBLE PROPERTY 



Cost of land— advanced to NCPC . . $146, 000. 00 



Construction costs 926, 784. 20 



Furniture and equipment — book 



value 5, 343. 88 



Land and other property donated. . . 414, 750. 00 



Gifts from foreign nations 1,787,000.00 3,279,878.08 



OTHER ASSETS 



Notes receivable — due later than one 



year $350, 000. 00 



Prepaid expenses — Creative America . 56, 425. 00 406, 425. 00 



Total assets $16, 512, 314. 09 



LIABILITIES AND NET WORTH 



LIABILITIES 



Payroll taxes withheld $1, 082. 34 



NET WORTH 



Pledges receivable $96, 002. 67 



Fund balance— June 30, 1965 16,415,229.08 16,511,231.75 



Total liabilities and net worth $16, 512, 314. 09 




340 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



EXHIBIT B 



STATEMENT OF INCOME, EXPENSES, AND FUND BALANCE 

 FOR THE YEAR JULY 1, 1964, THROUGH JUNE 30, 1965 



CONTRIBUTIONS AND PLEDGES PAID IN GEN- 

 ERAL ACCOUNTS 



National General Account $6, 255, 553. 36 



President's Business Committee 1, 361, 406. 36 



Washington Area Building Fund 661, 169. 01 



Washington Area Federal Employee 



Drive 1, 888. 63 



Interest Income 314, 054. 93 



National Tangible Property 1, 787, 000. 00 



Special Theatre Club 189, 614. 45 



Total general accounts $10, 570, 686. 74 



RESERVE ACCOUNTS 



National Reserve Account $104, 233. 98 



National Seat Reserve Account 161, 272. 78 



Washington Area Building Fund 603, 113. 94 



Washington Area Seat Reserve Ac- 

 count 209, 126. 63 



Washington Area Federal Employee 



Drive — Seat Endowment 3, 449. 63 



School Children's Reserve Fund 1, 207. 46 



Total reserve accounts 1, 082, 404. 42 



Total income $11, 653, 091. 16 



Deduct expenses — exhibit B-l 392, 811. 61 



Excess of receipts over expenses $11, 260, 279. 55 



Fund balance — beginning of year 4, 815, 154. 08 



Expenses prior to July 1, 1964, capitalized as construction 



costs 339, 795. 45 



Fund Balance— June 30, 1965 $16, 415, 229. 08 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 341 



EXHIBIT B-l 



STATEMENT OF EXPENSES FOR THE YEAR JULY 1, 1964, 

 THROUGH JUNE 30, 1965 



Salaries $76, 236. 04 



Extra help 3, 818. 77 



Depreciation — furniture and equipment 868. 34 



Equipment rental and repairs 2, 398. 01 



Meetings 4, 453. 23 



Office supplies and postage 3, 491. 54 



D.C. area expenses 6, 624. 17 



Printing and publicity 233. 51 



Promotion 32, 107. 83 



Publications 948. 60 



Telephone and telegraph 6, 863. 44 



Travel 17, 022. 29 



Taxes — payroll and civil service 4, 925. 18 



Unclassified (55. 58) 



Accounting and audit fees 4, 600. 00 



Legal fees 350. 00 



Insurance 1, 768. 93 



Public relations and fund raising fees 68, 637. 50 



President's Business Committee 45, 377. 92 



Metropolitan Opera 150, 000. 00 



Inaugural Ball— N.Y. World's Fair 313. 15 



Israeli Benefit 1, 427. 50 



Total $432, 410. 37 



Less — allocated to construction costs (-39, 598. 76) 



TOTAL EXPENSES $392, 811.61 





National Portrait Gallery 





National Portrait Gallery 



Charles Nagel, Director 



The National Portrait Gallery Commission is composed of the 

 following members: Catherine Drinker Bowen, Julian P. Boyd, John 

 Nicholas Brown, Lewis Deschler, David E. Finley, Wilmarth Sheldon 

 Lewis, Richard H. Shryock, and Frederick P. Todd. Ex officio mem- 

 bers of the Commission are Chancellor of the Smithsonian Institution, 

 Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United States ; Director of the Na- 

 tional Gallery of Art, John Walker; and Secretary of the Smithsonian 

 Institution, S. Dillon Ripley. The Commission met three times during 

 the fiscal year: on September 23, 1964, January 27, 1965, and May 19, 

 1965. The director also attended these meetings. 



Final bids were received on the alteration of the Fine Arts and Por- 

 trait Gallery Building, and work on it began on December 31, 1964. 

 Happily, new construction is proceeding satisfactorily. The director 

 and Victor Proetz have been working on plans for the exhibition areas 

 that will be coordinated with the structural drawings prepared by 

 the architects. 



In addition, John Frazer is pursuing a research project under con- 

 tract in the Frick Art Reference Library, and Mr. Proetz is under 

 similar contract for architectural studies of the exhibition areas of the 

 Gallery's new building. 



The staff of the Gallery is being augmented as rapidly as funds 

 permit and qualified personnel can be recruited. The director entered 

 on duty July 1, 1964. At the end of the year neither the position of 

 associate director nor that of historian-biographer had been filled, 

 but prospects seemed good for obtaining outstanding men for these 

 positions and for getting the archival programs of the Gallery organized 

 and underway. Staff members appointed during the year include 

 Robert G. Stewart, associate curator; William Walker, librarian; 

 Mrs. Shirley Harren, library assistant; Barnard Lebowitz, museum 

 aide; Mrs. Genevieve Kennedy, museum specialist; Jean T. Adamonis, 

 secretary; Carol Hutchinson and Barbara Boiling, clerk-typists. 



Meanwhile, preparations are being made for a temporary gallery 

 in the Arts and Industries Building in which to display some of the 

 present holdings until such time as the move into the new building 

 is consummated. 



During the year the director visited the National Portrait Galleries 

 of Dublin, Edinburgh, and London, where he found directors who 



345 




346 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



were all most cordial and willing to share the benefits of their experi- 

 ence. He also visited the Historical Museum in Mexico City to study 

 the use of dioramas in connection with historical material. 



During the year the accessions listed on pages 346-348 came as gifts 

 to the collections of the Gallery. Of these, the 34 likenesses transferred 

 to our collection by the National Gallery of Art as a gift from the late 

 Andrew Mellon constitute an outstandingly important accession during 

 the Gallery's initial year of operation. An additional portrait of John 

 James Audubon by his son was the gift of the Avalon Foundation. 

 For other gifts, such as the portrait of John Jordan Crittenden by 

 George P. A. Healy from Silas B. McKinley and that of Charles Lee 

 from Mrs. A. D. Pollack Gilmour, the Gallery is particularly grateful. 

 These portraits come to us as gifts from descendents of the sitters, the 

 ideal but no longer, unfortunately, the usual way of objects being added 

 to the collections. 



The four original drawings of Americans, a gift from the trustees of 

 the National Portrait Gallery of London, were particularly welcome 

 as evidence of the interest in our Gallery on the part of our great 

 precursor. 



In addition, the archives has acquired nearly 20,000 portrait prints 

 through the Metropolitan Museum from the Joseph V. Reed Collection 

 and from the Robbins Print Collection. 



PORTRAITS ACCEPTED BY THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT 

 GALLERY FOR FISCAL YEAR 1964-65 



SUBJECT 

 *Aubudon, John James 



*Buchanan, James 

 *Calhoun, John 

 *CIay, Henry 



♦Clay, Henry 

 *Clinton, DeWitt 

 Crittenden, John Jordan 



ARTIST 



John Woodhouse Au- 

 dubon 

 George P. A. Healy 

 Rembrandt Peale (att.) 

 John James Aubudon 



(att.) 

 George P. A. Healy 

 John Wesley Jarvis 

 George P. A. Healy 



Douglas, William Orville Oskar Stoessel 



Eisenhower, Dwight 

 David 

 ♦Eisenhower, Dwight 

 David 

 Finley, David E. 



John Groth 

 Thomas E. Stephens 

 Oskar Stoessel 



DONOR 

 Avalon Foundation 



Andrew Mellon 

 Andrew Mellon 

 Andrew Mellon 



Andrew Mellon 

 Andrew Mellon 

 Mr. & Mrs. Silas 



McKinley 

 David E. Finley 

 Arnold Roston 



Anonymous 



David E. Finley 



♦Portraits transferred to the National Portrait Gallery from the National Gallery 

 of Art. 




NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 



347 



PORTRAITS ACCEPTED BY THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT 

 GALLERY FOR FISCAL YEAR 1964-65— Continued 



SUBJECT 



Ford, Henry 

 ♦Forrestal, James Vincent 

 ♦Foster, Stephen 

 *Fuller, George 



Greeley, Horace 



♦Harrison, Benjamin, Jr. 

 ♦Harrison, William Henry 

 Harte, Francis Bret 



* Hawthorne, Nathaniel 

 ♦Hemingway, Ernest 

 ♦Howells, Mildred and 



William Dean 

 ♦Howells, William Dean 



♦Jackson, Andrew 

 ♦Laurens, Henry 

 ♦Laurens, Henry 



Lee, Charles 



^Lincoln, Abraham 

 ♦Mac Veagh, Wayne 

 ♦Marshall, George C. 

 ♦Marshall, John 

 ♦McCloskey, John Car- 

 dinal 

 ♦Men of Progress 

 ♦Monroe, James 

 Moody, Dwight Lyman 



♦Moultrie, William 

 ♦Muir, John 



Pershing, John J. 



♦Pierce, Franklin 

 ♦Pocahontas 

 Ripley, S. Dillon 



ARTIST 

 H. Wollner 

 Albert K. Murray 

 Thomas Hicks 

 George Fuller 



Thomas Nast 



Charles Willson Peale 

 James Reid Lambdin 

 Sir Leslie Ward 



Emanuel Leutze 



Rene Bolz 



Augustus Saint Gaudens 



John Quincy Adams 



Ward 

 Ralph E. W. Earl 

 John Singleton Copley 

 J. S. Copley (eng. by 



Green) 

 Cephas Thompson 



George P. A. Healy 

 Augustus Saint Gaudens 

 Thomas E. Stephens 

 James Reid Lambdin 

 George P. A. Healy 



Christian Schussele 

 John Vanderlyn 

 Carlo Pellegrini 



Charles Willson Peale 

 Edwin Keith Harkness 



Leopold Seyfert 



George P. A. Healy 

 British School 

 Robert White 



DONOR 



Henry Ford II 

 Anonymous 

 Andrew Mellon 

 Mrs. Augustus Vincent 



Tack 

 Trustees, London 



N.P.G. 

 Andrew Mellon 

 Andrew Mellon 

 Trustees, London 



N.P.G. 

 Andrew Mellon 

 Anonymous 

 Miss Mildred Howells 



Miss Mildred Howells 



Andrew Mellon 

 Andrew Mellon 

 Andrew Mellon 



Mrs. A. D. Pollack 

 Gilmour 



Andrew Mellon 



Eames Mac Veagh 



Anonymous 



Andrew Mellon 



Miss Elizabeth McClos- 

 key Cleary 



Andrew Mellon 



Andrew Mellon 



Trustees, London 

 N.P.G. 



Andrew Mellon 



Miss lone Bellamy 

 Harkness 



Mr. and Mrs. Dudley 

 Cooper 



Andrew Mellon 



Andrew Mellon 



S. Dillon Ripley 



♦Portraits transferred to the National Portrait Gallery from the National Gallery 

 of Art. 




348 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



PORTRAITS ACCEPTED BY THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT 

 GALLERY FOR FISCAL YEAR 1964-65— Continued 



SUBJECT 

 *Rochambeau, Comte de 

 Roosevelt, Franklin D. 

 Sankey, Ira David 



Stone, Harlan Fiske 

 Thayer, Abbott 

 *Truman, Harry S. 



ARTIST 



Joseph Desire Court 

 Oskar Stoessel 

 Carlo Pellegrini 



Oskar Stoessel 



DONOR 

 Andrew Mellon 

 David E. Finley 

 Trustees, London 



N.P.G. 

 David E. Finley 



Gladys Thayer Reasoner Roger C. Fenn 

 Augustus Vincent Tack Mrs. Augustus Vincent 

 Tack 



Jacob Eichholtz 

 Rembrandt Peale 

 George P. A. Healy 

 Sir Joseph Edgar 



Boehm 

 the National Portrait 



Andrew Mellon 

 Andrew Mellon 

 Andrew Mellon 

 Albert E. Gallatin 



Gallery from the National 



*Tyler, John 

 ♦Washington, George 

 ♦Webster, Daniel 

 *Whistler, James Abbott 

 McNeil 



* Portraits transferred to 

 Gallery of Art. 



The National Portrait Gallery Commission, after some discussion, 

 came to the conclusion that fine color photographs would be the ideal 

 medium in which to present to the public the likenesses of the current 

 holders of office in the Cabinet, Supreme Court, Senate, and the House 

 of Representatives. Some 556 pictures at the present moment are 

 involved, and the project would probably cost about $85,000 with 

 the photographs framed. Once the project is completed it would 

 take relatively little in the way of funds to keep it up to date, and 

 those members of Government who were replaced would automatically 

 become part of the iconographical archive with new photographs 

 simply inserted in the frames to replace them. It was thought wise, 

 because of the uncertainties of the lasting qualities of color, that both 

 a color and a black-and-white print of each photograph be supplied 

 for record purposes. 



The Gallery is making a late start and consequently is at a disad- 

 vantage in the matter of securing what objects there are available. 

 Purchase funds for the National Portrait Gallery are a must under 

 present conditions and every effort should be made to obtain them from 

 both public and private sources. Funds are vitally necessary to get 

 important objects that suddenly come on the market, and the National 

 Portrait Gallery should be in a competitive position to obtain such 

 objects for its collection. 



Meanwhile, all the portraits received from whatever source are 

 being checked to determine their condition and a conservation pro- 

 gram is being embarked upon which will include a number of new 

 frames. 




NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 349 



LIBRARY 



During the year the library accessioned 40 titles for the Gallery, 

 17 of these having been obtained through exchange or gift. William 

 Walker, though a member of the staff for less than a year, is making 

 excellent progress in building up the joint library for both the National 

 Portrait Gallery and National Collection of Fine Arts. He is seeing to 

 it that books are assigned to each bureau according to its greater need 

 and that a minimum of duplication is involved. It should be kept in 

 mind that what is purchased for the National Collection of Fine Arts is 

 available to the National Portrait Galllery and vice versa. At present, 

 we have a small but most valuable reference library in our temporary 

 offices in the Arts and Industries Building. 



At the May 1964 meeting, the Commissioners adopted the following 

 criteria for the Proposed Library Research and Publication Program 

 of the Gallery: 



The Library research and publication program of the National Portrait 

 Gallery must be conceived in broad terms if the Gallery is to make significant 

 contributions to education. 



To achieve this end, extensive biographical, archival, and iconographic 

 materials are essential, as is also a skilled and ample staff of librarians and 

 scholars who will engage in their own research as well as assist professional 

 visitors. Publication should also be provided for, since it is by publication that 

 the influence of the National Portrait Gallery will be most widely felt. 



The persons represented in the Library by drawings, prints, and photographs 

 should be far more numerous than those represented in the Gallery and should 

 include relatively minor figures as well as those of national significance. 

 Biographical information on such figures should be assembled for the use of 

 qualified scholars. 



If this program is carried out, the National Portrait Gallery will become a 

 national biographical and iconographical research center. Such a center 

 would include all standard reference works such as: 



1. General biographical dictionaries. 



2. Specialized dictionaries relating to regions, occupations, etc. 



3. Guides to and studies of biography as such. 



4. Critical and historical studies of American painting and other visual 



arts. 



5. National, state, and local histories. 



6. Files of journals devoted to American histories (national, regional, 



and state). 



7. Guides to collections of American manuscripts. 



8. Encyclopedias and bibliographies of American history. 



9. American biographies and memoirs. 



One of the Library's tasks would be the establishment of a national union 

 catalogue of likenesses germane to the basic purposes of the National Portrait 

 Gallery in public and private possession. 




350 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



In closing I should like to quote from a letter written by Thomas 

 Carlyle to David Lang in 1854 concerning a project of a National 

 Exhibition of Scottish Portraits. It puts forward in powerful fashion 

 the need for and the value of the portrait and, where possible, accom- 

 panying documentation. To the searcher after truth in the study of 

 people who have made a significant contribution to the history and 

 culture of their country, collections of such material are invaluable. 



In all my poor historical investigation it has been, and always is, one of the 

 most primary wants to procure a bodily likeness of the personage inquired after; 

 a good PORTRAIT, if such exists; failing that, even an indifferent if sincere one. 

 In short, any representation, made by a faithful human creature, of that Face 

 and Figure, which he saw with his own eyes, and which I can never see with 

 mine, is now valuable to me, and much better than none at all. This, which is 

 my own deep experience, I believe to be, in a deeper or less deep degree, the 

 universal one; and that every student and reader of History, who strives 

 earnestly to conceive for himself what manner of FACT and MAN this or the 

 other vague Historical NAME can have been will, as the first and directest 

 indication of all, search eagerly for a Portrait, for all the reasonable portraits 

 there are; and never rest till he have made out, if possible, what the man's 

 natural face was like. Often ... I have found that the Portrait was as a small 

 lighted candle by which the Biographies could for the first time be read, and 

 some interpretation made of them; the Biographical Personage no longer an 

 empty impossible Phantasm, or distracting aggregate of inconsistent rumors — ■ 

 in which state, alas his usual one, he is worth nothing to anybody . . . Next 

 in directness are a man's genuine Letters, if he have left any, and you can read 

 them to the bottom; of course a man's actions are the most complete and 

 indubitable stamp of him; but without these aids of Portraits and Letters, they 

 are in themselves so infinitely abstruse a stamp, and so confused by foreign 

 rumor and false tradition of them, as to be oftenest undecipherable with 

 certainty. 



This letter, written more than 100 years ago with all the quaintness 

 of phrase, punctuation, and capitalization characteristic of a letter 

 written by a great author about a field where his competence could be 

 considered as no more than ancillary, is yet a definitive statement of 

 the value to scholars of the collections we are belatedly endeavoring to 

 assemble for the National Portrait Gallery in Washington. 




Abraham Lincoln by George P. A. Healy. Oil on canvas, lAVs X 54M inches. 

 Gift of Andrew Mellon to the National Portrait Gallerv. 




Pocahontas, British School. Oil on canvas, 30 X 25 inches. Gift of Andrew 

 Mellon to the National Portrait Gallery. 




Henry Laurens, attributed to John Singleton Copley. Oil on canvas, 54H 

 X 405s inches. Gift of Andrew Mellon to the Nadonal Portrait Gallerv. 




Henry Ford, by H. Wollner. Bronze bust, 16 inches high. Gift of the Henry 

 Ford Trade School Alumni Association to the National Portrait Gallery. 




Radiation Biology Laboratory 





Radiation Biology Laboratory 

 W. H. Klein, Director 



On February 16, 1965, the Radiation Biology Laboratory was estab- 

 lished out of the Division of Radiation and Organisms as an inde- 

 pendent unit separate from the Astrophysical Observatory and 

 reporting directly to the Secretary through the Assistant Secretary for 

 Science. The laboratory will continue its emphasis upon three general 

 areas: regulatory biology, solar radiation measurements, and carbon 

 dating. The specific areas of biological research pursued during the 

 year include mechanisms of control of regulatory responses by non- 

 ionizing radiation such as phototropism, photomorphogenesis, the 

 induction of photosynthetic activity, and the interaction of ionizing 

 radiation such as X-rays with synthetic and morphological systems. 



A study has been completed of the composition of a water-soluble 

 chloroplast protein fraction extracted from etiolated bean leaves 

 greened in the presence and absence of chloramphenicol. The proteins 

 of the water-soluble chloroplast fraction were analyzed by assessing 

 the reaction to antisera of chloramphenicol treated and untreated 

 plastids, by column chromatography, and by zone electrophoresis on 

 acrylamide gel. 



Chloramphenicol caused an accumulation of a water-soluble chloro- 

 plast protein fraction. This accumulation resulted from a decrease 

 in the amount of some proteins found in the water soluble fraction 

 and an increase in others. It had previously been found that chloram- 

 phenicol partially inhibited light-dependent formation of chloroplast 

 protein and lamellae. Therefore, it was concluded that chloram- 

 phenicol inhibited the formation of some protein needed for building 

 lamellae, resulting in accumulation in the soluble fraction of lamellar 

 protein whose synthesis is insensitive to chloramphenicol. 



Experiments have been initiated to determine the effects of illumina- 

 tion on the ability of chloroplasts isolated from etiolated bean leaves 

 to synthesize proteins in vitro. 



In the area of polyphosphate structure, model phosphorus compounds 

 such as trimetaphosphoimidate were chemically synthesized. Natural 

 polyphosphate and model compounds were compared as to hydrolysis 

 properties, infrared spectra, and phosphorus-to-nitrogen ratios. 



353 



7S9-427— 66' 35 




354 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



A study of the products of various chemical and enzymatic hydrolyses 

 of natural polyphosphates was concluded. The results indicated that 

 natural "polyphosphates" are really not linear phosphate anhydrides 

 and, therefore, are not true polyphosphates. 



Polyphosphates were also isolated from uniformly C 14 -labeled 

 Chorella cells and shown to be free from radioactivity. Thus, for 

 the first time, the polyphosphate from Chorella has been shown to be 

 truly inorganic. 



The study of the biochemical events occurring between an etiolated 

 plant's first exposure to radiant energy and the manifestation of the 

 light-induced morphological changes has been continued. The 

 demonstration of the significant role of the endogenous reducing and 

 nonreducing sugars has led to a detailed study of the incorporation, 

 distribution, and utilization of exogenously supplied radioactive 

 substrate. 



Glucose in solution applied to etiolated leaf tissue is incorporated 

 almost entirely as sucrose. In light-treated samples the primary 

 effect during the first few hours is an increased disappearance of 

 sucrose. However, after an extended dark development period, the 

 light response is reflected as loss of fructose. In general, results ob- 

 tained substantiated the fact that the photomorphogenic response is 

 dependent upon endogenous carbohydrate levels. 



Of particular significance is the inverse relationship between the 

 disappearance of C 14 from the ethanol soluble fraction and the accumu- 

 lation of C 14 in the cellulosic residue. These changes were easily 

 determined during the first few hours following photomorphogenic 

 induction. Significant changes were also observed in the basic (amino 

 acids) and acidic (organic acids) fractions obtained through ion ex- 

 change techniques. Identification of the specific compounds involved 

 is now being pursued. 



In vivo spectrophotometric measurements of the phytochrome pigment 

 controlling photomorphogenesis in 6-day-old dark grown bean seedlings 

 indicate that the disappearance of the active form of the pigment after 

 formation by red light is a pseudo second order reaction. Thus a plot 

 of the reciprocal of the pigment concentration versus time gives a 

 straight line. This fact allows for the interpolation and extrapolation 

 of pigment concentrations at any time after inductive exposures and 

 allows for the calculation of the amounts of inactive red-absorbing form 

 of the pigment present at any time. Such calculations indicate little or 

 no dark reversion of the 730-absorbing form to the 660-absorbing form 

 and very little, if any, dark synthesis of the 660-absorbing form. 



A comparison of growth in three environmentally controlled areas, 

 with light quality the variable factor, indicates that the direction of 




RADIATION BIOLOGY LABORATORY 355 



change in day length has marked influences on physiological responses 

 in the day neutral plant, Black Valentine Bean. As day length increases 

 there is a pronounced increase in dry weight, stem elongation, number 

 of flowers and fruit set. These are reduced quite sharply with decreas- 

 ing day lengths even though the total day length is relatively long. 

 These differences in growth are most pronounced in the areas where 

 there are large amounts of far -red radiation present. 



Data obtained from Wintex barley, a long-day plant, agrees with 

 the dry-weight determinations for bean, indicating the influence of 

 seasonal change in photosynthetic periods. Although the critical photo- 

 period for Wintex barley is 14.5 hours, flower induction occurs in older 

 plants planted in November when the maximum day length is 10.5 

 hours. Also plants grown under sources containing longer wavelengths 

 produce a marked increase in the number of elongated inter nodes as 

 compared with plants grown in the absence of longer wavelengths. 

 No significant differences have been observed between the different 

 environmental conditions for fresh weights of shoots and roots or 

 chlorophyll concentrations. 



The light-sensitive sporangiophore of Phycomyces has been demon- 

 strated to respond to mechanical stimuli in much the same manner as 

 to light. After a pressure increase in the cell there is a decrease in 

 growth rate, and after a decrease in pressure there is an increase in 

 growth rate. The time course of these responses is the same as for the 

 light-induced growth responses. The interaction between the light- 

 and mechanically-induced responses is not yet known. 



Near normal growth rates have been achieved in sporangiophores 

 immersed in aerated water in which the osmotic pressure is about 3.4 

 atmospheres using either glucose or inorganic salts. Using such an 

 aqueous system it was demonstrated that materials can be taken up 

 selectively by the light-sensitive growing zone, since the fluorescent dye 

 phloxine was incorporated only into the wall of the growing zone. 

 A number of other fluorescent dyes were examined, but none was 

 incorporated. 



Approximately 100 samples of archeologic and geologic interest were 

 dated by carbon- 14 techniques. A new system was developed for 

 quantitatively removing radon from samples by passing carbon dioxide 

 through an activated charcoal trap at — 40°G. This method now 

 makes it possible to count radiocarbon samples immediately without 

 the 30- or 45-day delay which was previously necessary. 



Water samples from the saline lake at the head of Antonette Bay, 

 Ellesmere Island, were analyzed, and the data indicate that the lake 

 was cut off from the fiord by glacial advance about 3,000 years ago. 



A survey of marine deposits on the east coast between Washington, 




356 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



D.C., and Myrtle Beach, S.C., did not indicate that the sea was above 

 its present level in the last 50,000 years. The age of the Pamlico 

 formation is greater than 45,000 years. 



Measurements of total sun and sky radiation have continued using 

 an automatic system sampling once every 3 minutes for 100 m/x, band 

 widths throughout the visible. Because of slight variations in calibra- 

 tion constants indicated to be the result of the geometry of the standard 

 pyranometer, a new square receiver pyranometer was designed to 

 eliminate these variations. The total energy received upon a hori- 

 zontal surface varies markedly, with weather conditions as expected, 

 and spectral quality does change. For example, the energy received 

 for a series of days in the month of November varied from 343 langleys 

 for a clear day to 70 langleys for a cloudy day with some snow. Simi- 

 larly, the ratio of the 0.6-0.7 micron band to 0.7-0.8 micron band 

 changed from 3.4 to 1.6. 



OTHER ACTIVITIES 



The laboratory staff participated in a number of scientific meetings 

 during the year. 



In July Dr. Klein collaborated with representatives of the Division 

 of Biology and Medicine, U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, to deter- 

 mine the feasibility of making a prospective population genetics study 

 in Iceland; he also surveyed sites near Keflavik, Iceland, to evaluate 

 the possibility of establishing a field station for measuring solar radia- 

 tion in high northern latitudes. In August Dr. Klein attended the 

 Fourth International Photobiology Congress in Oxford, England, and 

 participated in a symposium on phytochrome research. 



In June and July Dr. Shropshire consulted with investigators in 

 photobiology and biophysics at Gif-Sur-Yvette, Zurich, Tubingen, 

 Freiburg, Eindhoven, Wageningen, Amsterdam, Copenhagen, Uppsala, 

 and Stockholm. During this trip he presented a lecture at Le Phyto- 

 tron, Gif-Sur-Yvette, entitled "Phytochrome Controlled Responses" 

 and one at the Max-Planck Institut fur Biologie, Tubingen, entitled 

 "Light-Induced Biochemical Changes and High Intensity Range 

 Responses of Phycomyces." In August he attended the Photobiology 

 Congress at Oxford and presented a symposium lecture, "Photoresponses 

 in Phycomyces Sporangiophores," at the 10th International Botanical 

 Congress in Edinburgh. 



In August the American Institute of Biological Sciences meeting in 

 Boulder, Colo., was attended by Dr. Correll, Mr. Edwards, Dr. Klein, 

 Dr. Loercher, Dr. Margulies, and Dr. Mitrakos. Dr. Correll presented 

 a paper on "Alkali-Stable RNA Fragments from Chlorella," and Mr. 




RADIATION BIOLOGY LABORATORY 357 



Edwards and Dr. Klein presented recent data on "Relationship of 

 Phytochrome Concentration and Physiological Responses." 



Dr. Klein participated in the executive committee sessions of the 

 American Society of Plant Physiologists. 



Mr. Harrison attended the Advanced Seminar for Scientific Glass- 

 blowers held in August at the State University of New York, Alfred, 

 NY. 



In March Dr. Klein attended the meetings of the Solar Energy 

 Society in Phoenix, Ariz., and in April he was a participant in the 

 18th Annual Research Conference in Gatlinburg sponsored by the 

 Biology Division of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. 



Also in March Dr. Correll was invited to present a seminar, "RNA 

 Polyphosphate in Algae," to the Department of Botany, University of 

 California, Berkeley, and Dr. Shropshire was invited to present a 

 lecture on "Phycomyces Research" to the Department of Biology of 

 the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. 



In March Dr. Shropshire consulted with Dr. Cairns of the Cold 

 Spring Harbor Laboratory of Quantitative Biology to make arrange- 

 ments for cooperatively offering, with Dr. Dennison of Dartmouth and 

 Dr. Delbriick of the California Institute of Technology, an intensive 

 course to be supported by the National Science Foundation on sensory 

 physiology and the photoresponses of Phycomyces. 



In April Dr. Correll attended the meetings of the American Chemical 

 Society held in Detroit, Mich., and Mr. Long attended the annual 

 meetings of the American Geophysical Society in Washington, D.C. 



Dr. Margulies presented a paper entitled "Effect of Chloramphenicol 

 on Structure and Protein Composition of Bean Chloroplasts" to the 

 Washington Area Section of the American Society of Plant Physiolo- 

 gists, held at the University of Maryland in May. 



Dr. Shropshire was an invited participant at the Thirtieth Cold 

 Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology held in June on 

 sensory receptors. 



In May Mr. Long visited the Lamont Geological Observatory in 

 Palisades, N.Y., to use their mass spectrograph for C 13 analysis. He 

 also attended the carbon dating conference held at Washington State 

 University in June and presented a paper, "Techniques of Methane 

 Preparation for Carbon Dating." 



STAFF CHANGES AND VISITING SCIENTISTS 



Scientists who joined the staff during the year are Dr. Bernard Nebel, 

 plant physiologist, and Dr. Robert Rogers, cytogeneticist. Dr. Kon- 




358 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



stantinos Mitrakos, visiting plant physiologist from Athens, Greece, 

 and Dr. Adolf Steiner, visiting plant physiologist from the University 

 of Freiburg, continued their work on carbohydrate metabolism. 

 On June 30, 1965, the laboratory staff consisted of 33 persons. 



PUBLICATIONS 



Correll, David L. Sialic acid-containing glycopeptide from Chlorella. 

 Science, vol. 145, pp. 588-589, 1964. 



. Alkali-stable RNA fragments from Chlorella. 



Phytochemistry, vol. 4, pp. 453-459, 1965. 



Loercher, Lars, and Liverman, James L. Influence of cobalt on 

 leaf expansion and oxidative phosphorylation. Plant Physiol., vol. 

 39, pp. 720-725, 1964. 



Margulies, Maurice M. Effect of chloramphenicol on light-depend- 

 ent synthesis of proteins and enzymes of leaves and chloroplasts of 

 Phaseolus vulgaris. Plant Physiol., vol. 39, pp. 579-585, 1964. 



. Relationship between red light mediated glyceraldehyde-3- 



phosphate dehydrogenase formation and light-dependent develop- 

 ment of photosynthesis. Plant Physiol., vol. 40, pp. 57-61, 1965. 



Shropshire, W., Jr.; Klein, W. H.; and Edwards, J. L. Photomor- 

 phogenesis induced by flavin-mononucleotide fluorescence. Physiol. 

 Plantarum, vol. 17, pp. 676-682, 1964. 




Science Information Exchange 





Science Information Exchange 

 Monroe E. Freeman, Director 



The Science Information Exchange (SIE) receives, organizes, and 

 disseminates information about scientific research in progress. Its 

 mission is to assist the planning and management of research activ- 

 ities supported by Government and non-Government agencies and 

 institutions by promoting the exchange of information that concerns 

 subject matter, distribution, level of effort, and other data pertaining 

 to current research in the prepublication stage. It helps program 

 directors and administrators to avoid unwarranted duplication and 

 to determine the most advantageous distribution of research funds. 

 It serves the entire scientific community by informing individual 

 investigators about who is currently working on problems in their 

 special fields. 



The Exchange is concerned only with research actually in progress 

 in order to cover the 1- to 3-year information gap between the time 

 a research project is proposed or started and the time the results 

 become generally available in published form. Thus, the Exchange 

 complements, rather than duplicates, the services of technical libraries 

 and established documentation centers. 



Information is received by the Exchange from all available sources, 

 specifying who supports a research task, who does it, where it is being 

 done, and a 200-word technical summary of what is being done. 

 These basic data are cast into a one-page record, the Notice of Re- 

 search Project (NRP), that serves as the major input and output of 

 the Exchange. These records are analyzed, indexed, processed, and 

 stored in computer and manual files in such a way that a wide variety 

 of questions about any of these items or any combination of items can 

 be quickly retrieved or compiled. 



The acquisition of research task records and the output of infor- 

 mation services have continued to increase throughout the year. 

 Registration of unclassified research by the Federal agencies is now 

 approaching comprehensive proportions with registration including 

 more than 95 percent of all federally sponsored research in the life, 

 medical, biological, agricultural, and behavioral sciences, and with 

 more than 60 percent of basic research in the physical sciences. Inter- 

 est and participation by non-Federal research groups have shown a 



361 




362 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



slow but steady increase particularly in state programs in agricul- 

 ture, natural resources, and conservation, a trend that will probably 

 continue over the years for these relatively smaller and widely scat- 

 tered research programs. A number of associations, widely varying 

 in scope, such as the American Sociological Society and the American 

 Chemical Society's Petroleum Research Fund, have arranged for 

 increased input and participation. Discussions with many others 

 are under way. 



The demand for information services, on the other hand, has increased 

 substantially, rising from 34,000 information requests in fiscal year 

 1964 to an estimated 43,000 in 1965. Especially significant has been 

 an increasing demand from Federal agencies for the retrieval and 

 organization of research records covering broad fields of national 

 interest, such as all current research on water resources, pesticides, 

 and oceanography, or the organization of records covering broad 

 agency programs. About 1 8 of these major tasks involving the scien- 

 tific staff and data-processing specialists have been completed or are in 

 various stages of planning and development, compared with 6 such com- 

 pilations in 1964. These compilations, such as the Water Resources 

 Research Catalog, are often published and widely disseminated by the 

 sponsoring agency. In connection with this particular catalog, SIE 

 was designated by the President, in October 1964, as the national 

 cataloging center for current and projected scientific research in all 

 fields of water resources. 



The expanding services of SIE have been noted and commended 

 in the past year by the President's report, War on Waste; in the report 

 of the Select Committee on Government Research, House of Repre- 

 sentatives; and by Senator Clinton P. Anderson in reference to the 

 Water Resources Research Catalog. Recognizing that the comprehensive 

 collection of current research records serves little purpose unless used 

 to the maximum by scientists and engineers throughout the scientific 

 community, SIE has made increasing efforts to make these services 

 known and available to all eligible and potential users. More than 

 60 articles, news notes, and briefings about SIE have been presented 

 to scientific groups or published in a wide variety of scientific journals. 

 Thirty thousand descriptive brochures were distributed, mostly on 

 request. An information exhibit was set up at the national meeting 

 of the Association for Clinical Research. Over the year, almost 800 

 visitors came to SIE to study and explore its programs, including 

 35 visitors from foreign countries. 



An increased interest in SIE has been exhibited by many foreign 

 visitors, especially in regard to the future possibility of exchange 

 arrangements. This has been seconded by a rising interest from 




SCIENCE INFORMATION EXCHANGE 363 



American agencies whose research interests and responsibilities do not 

 necessarily stop at international boundaries. 



As a result of a 2-year program to increase efficiency and economies, 

 substantial savings over anticipated needs have been realized. Al- 

 though workloads generally increased in some activities as much as 

 20 to 25 percent, the total staff was increased by only 2% percent 

 while nonprofessional personnel decreased from 115 to 108. In illus- 

 tration of the effectiveness of new systems, the registration cost of 

 70,000 projects was reduced 16 percent, the registration cost of 

 research proposals was reduced 50 percent, and the production cost 

 of investigator reports was reduced 20 percent over fiscal year 1964. 



In addition to the continued effort to improve its present system, 

 SIE is conducting a number of studies of more general relevancy to 

 the field of information. From the vantage point of a current aware- 

 ness program unique in terms of breadth of science areas covered, 

 experience, and methods of approach, SIE professional staff were 

 engaged in the systematic study of the following problems: 



1 . The use of current scientific research information for adminis- 



trative purposes. 



2. The evaluation of performance in retrieval by cooperative 



study with participating Federal programs. 



3. The development of new indexing systems for publication pur- 



poses as program management tools, also of value at the bench 

 level. 



4. Information yield as a function of the depth of indexing. 



5. The study of education and experience requirements for the 



recognition of scientific content and context. 



6. The economics of computer storage and retrieval, as part of 



a broader study on optimal combinations of human and 

 computer resources. 





National Armed Forces Museum 

 Advisory Board 





National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board 



John H. Magruder III, Director 



At its fourth meeting, on January 12, 1965, the National Armed 

 Forces Museum Advisory Board recommended to the Board of Regents 

 that— 



1. The Smithsonian Institution's facilities be expanded under the 



provisions of Public Law 87-186 to include a National 

 Armed Forces Museum. 



2. Provisions be made in a reorganization plan of the President 



or by legislation to transfer to the Smithsonian Institution 

 such authority as is necessary to enable it to administer and 

 maintain Fort Washington as a site for the National Armed 

 Forces Museum. 



3. The Smithsonian Institution be directed by legislation to 



pursue the planning, development, and construction of a 

 National Armed Forces Museum and that such sums be 

 appropriated by the Congress to the Smithsonian Institution 

 as may be necessary for these purposes. 



These recommendations were based on a detailed study completed 

 by the Advisory Board with the assistance of its coordinating staff, 

 headed by Col. John H. Magruder III, U.S. Marine Corps. Later 

 in the year the Board's study was published under the title A Study 

 Relating to the Establishment of a National Armed Forces Museum (Smith- 

 sonian Publication 4611). 



On January 28, 1965, the Board of Regents approved the foregoing 

 recommendations subject to the condition that the legislation to be 

 sought would authorize only the planning of a National Armed Forces 

 Museum, not construction, at this time. The Board of Regents 

 further approved the submission of a request for an initial appro- 

 priation not to exceed SI 00,000 for planning. Subsequently, the 

 Smithsonian Institution, in compliance with the provisions of Public 

 Law 87-186, undertook preliminary consultations with the Commis- 

 sion of Fine Arts, the National Capital Planning Commission, and the 

 General Services Administration, preparatory to submitting formal 

 recommendations to the Congress with respect to the establishment 

 of a National Armed Forces Museum and the acquisition of a site. 



Throughout the year the staff of the National Armed Forces Museum 

 Advisory Board carried on negotiations with various agencies of the 

 Armed Forces and the General Services Administration in regard to 



367 




368 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



the transfer to the Smithsonian Institution of military and naval 

 objects appropriate for the collections of the proposed National Armed 

 Forces Museum. As a result, a numerous and most varied assortment 

 of objects was added to the collections. For example, there were 

 acquired from the Department of the Army two now-rare Model 

 1903 6-inch coast defense guns complete with disappearing carriages; 

 from the Department of the Navy a 5-inch deck gun with fire-control 

 equipment from the World War II submarine U.S.S. Scabbardfish; 

 from the U.S. Marine Corps the prototype of the M50 ONTOS 

 self-propelled antitank vehicle; and from the General Services Admin- 

 istration a valuable series of wind tunnel models used in the develop- 

 ment of the U.S. Army Nike Ajax and Nike Hercules guided missiles. 

 Among objects designated for eventual transfer to the Smithsonian, 

 the Department of the Army, with the cooperation of the Depart- 

 ment of Defense, set aside a most comprehensive array of components 

 of the Nike Ajax, Lacrosse, Corporal, Redstone, and SS-10 missile 

 systems. 



The staff, in cooperation with the Smithsonian Library, continued 

 to acquire from Armed Forces historical agencies and elsewhere 

 numerous publications in the field of military and naval history, to 

 serve as a nucleus of the study center library of the National Armed 

 Forces Museum. 




Smithsonian Museum Service 





789-427—66 36 





Smithsonian Museum Service 

 G. Carroll Lindsay, Curator 



The Smithsonian Museum Service expanded both the variety and 

 quantity of its services in accepting the challenge of serving the 

 nearly 19 million visitors who came to the Smithsonian in fiscal 1965. 

 Moving forward at a quickened pace, the Smithsonian Museum Ser- 

 vice established new programs designed to interest a public growing 

 more knowledgeable and sophisticated each year. 



One of the most successful new programs was a series of free film pres- 

 entations, known as the Smithsonian Free Film Theater. The Theater 

 presents unusual films that are entertaining as well as educational. 

 Showing is augmented by brief introductory remarks from noted scien- 

 tists and specialists whose work often is seen in the films. The enormous 

 response to this new program from museum visitors is further proof of 

 the great potential of the Smithsonian as a practitioner of the special 

 art of museum education. This program was organized and operated 

 by audiovisual specialist Mary Ann Friend and Mrs. Linda Gordon, 

 docent in zoology. 



The Smithsonian Museum Service continued its role of interpreting, 

 through various educational media, the work and collections of the 

 Smithsonian in the fields of science, history, and art. 



For the eleventh consecutive year the Junior League of Washington 

 continued its volunteer docent program, conducting school classes 

 from the greater Washington area through the Smithsonian. The 

 program was carried out through the cooperation of G. Carroll Lindsay, 

 curator of the Smithsonian Museum Service, with Mrs. Arnold B. 

 McKinnon, chairman of the League's docent committee, and Mrs. 

 Joseph Smith, Jr. co-chairman. Mrs. Smith will serve as chairman for 

 the forthcoming year, with Mrs. Gilbert Grosvenor as co-chairman. 



During the 1964-65 school year 33,821 children were conducted on 

 1,161 tours, an increase of over 50 percent above the preceding year's 

 participation. 



Tours were conducted for grades 3 through 6 in the Halls of Every- 

 day Life in the American Past, Mammals, Indians and Eskimos, Native 

 Peoples of the Americas, and Textiles, and for grades 5 through 

 junior high school, in the Halls of Gems and Minerals, and Prehistoric 

 Life. The resumption this year of tours in the popular Early American 



371 




372 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Hall, now in the Museum of History and Technology, alone accounted 

 for 13,016 children participating in 438 tours. 



Tours were conducted from October 12, 1964, through May 28, 

 1965. This year, tours were able to proceed during the month of 

 April, with the aid of compact portable amplifiers which enabled the 

 docent to be heard even when the hall was massively crowded with 

 tourists. 



In addition to Mrs. McKinnon and Mrs. Smith, the members of the 

 League's guided tour committee were: Mrs. Roger Block, Mrs. 

 Thomas A. Bradford, Jr., Mrs. Reginald Bragonier, Mrs. Keith A. 

 Garr, Mrs. Challen E. Caskie, Mrs. Thomas R. Cate, Mrs. C. A. 

 Child, Mrs. F. David Clarke, Mrs. Steven Conger, Mrs. Phillip 

 Dearborn, Mrs. Henry M. deButts, Mrs. James L. Dooley, Mrs. 

 Robert T. Foley, Mrs. George Gerber, Mrs. Gilbert Grosvenor, Mrs. 

 Franklin Hart, Mrs. William Henry, Mrs. Scott Heuer, Mrs. Walter M. 

 Johnson, Jr., Mrs. Vernon Knight, Mrs. Lansing Lamont, Mrs. 

 James H. Lefeaver, Miss Robbin Liggett, Mrs. Dickson R. Loos, 

 Mrs. James Mailliard, Mrs. John Manfuso, Jr., Mrs. Ernest May, 

 Mrs. H. Roemer McPhee, Jr., Mrs. James E. Miller, Mrs. William 

 Minshall, Jr., Mrs. R. Kendall Nottingham, Mrs. Edward Outlaw, 

 Mrs. Jack Osburn, Jr., Mrs. Robert Point, Mrs. L. Edgar Prina, 

 Mrs. W. James Sears, Mrs. E. Tilman Stirling, Mrs. William R. 

 Stratton, Mrs. Charles Turner, Mrs. John S. Voorhees, Mrs. Richard 

 Wallis, Mrs. Keith Wheelock, Mrs. Mark White, and Mrs. Kennedy 

 Wilson. 



The Institution values most highly the proficient endeavors of 

 these volunteers. Their services to the schools of the Washington 

 area do much to make the Smithsonian museums effective educational 

 resources. 



The staff of the Museum Service also provided tours of the exhibits 

 for a large number of individuals and groups. These tours for visitors 

 from all over the United States as well as abroad were given in a foreign 

 language for those who were unfamiliar with English. Among the 

 many distinguished visitors were Her Royal Highness Princess Christina 

 of Sweden and Her Royal Highness Princess Benedikte of Denmark. 



In addition to offering such services as tours, members of the staff of 

 the Museum Service gave lectures to groups both at the Smithsonian 

 and outside. 



To assist the large number of museum visitors, the Museum Service 

 maintained information aides at the entrances of the museum buildings 

 during the summer. About 100 young men from the National Capitol 

 Council of Churches' Neighborhood Youth Corps assisted with this 

 activity, as did a local Girl Scout troop. 




SMITHSONIAN MUSEUM SERVICE 373 



The Audioguide system in the Museum of Natural History continued 

 in operation, offering visitors general as well as detailed information 

 about the exhibits, through tape-recorded lectures. 



Mrs. Linda Gordon, docent in zoology, and Mrs. Marjorie Halpin, 

 docent in anthropology, responded to requests for services and informa- 

 tion in their special fields. They also assisted members of the scientific 

 staff with the training of the Junior League volunteer guides, and 

 prepared bibliographies for use in responding to inquiries from the 

 public. Mrs. Gordon, in conjunction with her responsibilities to the 

 Free Film Theater, wrote several film reviews. Mrs. Halpin wrote and 

 revised information leaflets and prepared a manuscript for an illustrated 

 booklet on George Catlin's Indian paintings. 



Audiovisual programs continued under the direction of Mary Ann 

 Friend, the audiovisual specialist. A large number of slides were sold 

 or lent to individuals and groups for educational purposes. Photo- 

 graphs and films also were distributed in the same manner. These 

 audiovisual aids are provided as educational aids to persons who are 

 not able to visit the Smithsonian. Many slides and photographs also 

 were used by various communications media to publicize the work and 

 activities of the Smithsonian. 



The second edition of the Brief Guide to the Museums in the Washington 

 Area was published. Reproductions of two paintings by Stuart Davis 

 were published in conjunction with the Stuart Davis Memorial 

 Exhibition. 



Many publications interpreting the exhibits were made available at 

 the Museum Shops, and visitors may browse at shops in the Museum 

 of History and Technology, Museum of Natural History, and the Arts 

 and Industries Building. Each area emphasizes self-service to allow 

 visitors the greatest freedom in making their selections. In addition to 

 publications, reproductions of objects in the collections are available, 

 and prints, slides, and postcards also are sold. 



During the past year receptions were held in connection with openings 

 of temporary exhibits and halls, presentations, and on other special 

 occasions. The Museum Service arranged for the preparation of 

 invitations, for the greeting and directing of guests, for catering services, 

 and for other related functions. Among the important special events 

 was a luncheon for the Medal of Freedom recipients which was held at 

 the Smithsonian in conjunction with the inauguration of the President 

 of the United States. Particular attention was given also to details of 

 special meetings and conferences held here. 



The Urban Service Corps, as in the past, held several summer sessions 

 at the Smithsonian. Mrs. Linda Gordon organized the classes at the 

 museums, providing speakers, films, and tours. 




374 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Members of the staff made trips to various cities to attend and 

 participate in conferences, seminars, and scholarly sessions, to confer 

 on and to observe sales and audiovisual operations, and to study and 

 discuss museum connoisseurship. 



William Grayson, consultant on television, film, and radio broad- 

 casting, worked on programs to expand the Smithsonian's use of the 

 mass media of broadcasting and film. Under his supervision, broad- 

 cast coverage increased, and groundwork was laid for further activity 

 in this area. Arrangements also were made for radio and television 

 coverage of Smithsonian exhibits and events, and special announce- 

 ments of such events were sent to a large number of radio and television 

 stations. 



The Museum Service also prepared a monthly Calendar of Events 

 of lectures, concerts, and temporary exhibits at the Smithsonian. 

 Notices of these events were sent to newspapers, magazines, and other 

 publications. In the spring the format of the Calendar was revised 

 to facilitate mailing and to make the Calendar serve as an official invi- 

 tation to the public to attend Smithsonian activities. 



Mrs. Paul Scott made a study of a membership program for the 

 Smithsonian. She visited other museums and spoke and corresponded 

 with persons well known for their work in this area. Her report 

 encompassed not only operation of such a program but also activities 

 and publications offered to the members — activities and publications 

 designed to attract further interest in the Institution. 




Smithsonian Institution Library 





Smithsonian Institution Library 



Mary A. Huffer, Acting Librarian 



During the year emphasis has been placed upon improving services 

 and strengthening the collections. The Library Committees have been 

 active in advising and assisting the Library in formulating an acquisi- 

 tions policy. During the summer a physical count and analysis of all 

 materials under the Library's jurisdiction was made. For the first time 

 in many years there is an accurate picture of the size and distribution 

 of the various collections under the Library's administration, as well 

 as the degree of bibliographic control exercised over them. Over 

 the years the book collections have been acquired and added to the 

 Library but never fully classified or cataloged, even though in some 

 instances they are among the most heavily used and valuable portions 

 of the Library's collections. Although the Library has maintained an 

 active weeding program, it has not always counted the discarded or 

 transferred material or adjusted the statistics. A summary of the data 

 from the count is given in table 1 ; the official count given in table 2 

 in the Summarized Statistics at the end of this report excludes all 

 material not fully classified and cataloged, and all unbound pieces of 

 serial material. Trade catalog literature and technical reports, 

 because of the special manner in which they are processed, are listed 

 separately. The official count will quickly climb back to the level of 

 totals previously reported, as the partially cataloged and classified 

 materials are processed in the reclassification program. 



Table 1— SUMMARY COUNT OF LIBRARY MATERIALS CATA- 

 LOGED AND UNCATALOGED*, SEPTEMBER 1964 



Cataloged Uncataloged Totals 



Monographs 88, 921 104, 028 192, 949 



Serials (bound) 85, 312 45, 506 130, 818 



Serials (unbound)** 19, 738 22, 444 42, 182 



Trade Catalogs 3, 923 216, 241 220, 164 



Technical Reports 8, 000 8, 000 



Totals 205,894 388,219 594,113 



•Partially cataloged material was counted as uncataloged for purposes of this survey. 

 **By estimated number of bound volumes. 



78^-427—66 37 377 




378 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Of major significance was the decision in March to begin to classify 

 all incoming materials according to the Library of Congress classi- 

 fication scheme and start a divided catalog. A full-scale reclassification 

 program is planned as soon as staff becomes available; in the meantime, 

 however, materials handled under this new system are moving appreci- 

 ably faster through the cataloging process and into the hands of the user. 

 Another significant development was the work begun in the acquisitions 

 section to make use of the IBM 1440 computer in all applicable phases 

 of its work. Coding and programing have proceeded to the point 

 where early in fiscal 1966 all accounting and ordering procedures 

 concerning monographic materials will be handled by the computer. 

 Studies are continuing within the Library concerning possible future 

 computer applications. 



After the creation of the Smithsonian Office of Anthropology in 

 March 1964, Mary L. Horgan, who had been appointed Bureau of 

 American Ethnology librarian in September, was designated librarian 

 of the newly created Smithsonian Office of Anthropology Branch 

 Library. She has spent a considerable amount of time planning the 

 consolidation and move of the former Bureau of American Ethnology 

 and Department of Anthropology libraries into new quarters on the 

 third floor of the Natural History Building. 



Material submitted this year for translation on the Special Foreign 

 Currency Science Information Program, formerly called the P.L. 480 

 translation program, consisted of 5 volumes in Russian, totaling 3,119 

 pages. Translation of several important sets is gradually being effected: 

 G. P. Dement'ev's Birds of the Soviet Union, 6 volumes, and S. I. 

 Ognev's Mammals of USSR and Adjacent Countries, 9 volumes, each 

 lack only 1 volume to be submitted for completion of the set. Four 

 volumes of the 30-volume Flora USSR are in process or finished and 

 progress is being made on other sets. At present there is a list of 

 164 volumes totaling over 63,000 pages, requested by Smithsonian 

 research staff, waiting for translation from Russian into English. 



An event which will continue to have great impact on the Library 

 was the establishment within the past year of the Federal Library 

 Committee to improve coordination and planning among research 

 libraries of the Federal Government. The acting librarian is serving 

 on the Task Force on Acquisition of Library Materials and Correlation 

 of Federal Library Resources of this committee. 



As an additional service and aid to keep staff members informed 

 of all newly acquired materials, the Library began on October 31 to 

 issue on a biweekly basis a new-book list. Twenty-three lists have 

 been issued to date. 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION LIBRARY 379 



While its primary purpose is service to the Museum staff, the Library 

 has become over the years an important center of research for other 

 scholars and students. During the past year numerous visitors from 

 throughout the United States and the world came to use the Library's 

 facilities and to seek the help of its staff. 



During fiscal 1965 the reference staff contributed and assisted in 

 the construction of the Central Pacific Reference File. This file, 

 patterned on the concept used in organizing the Human Relations 

 Area Files, came about in response to the need of the staff on the 

 Pacific Program to have ready access to all the information that could 

 be located in domestic and foreign sources on a group of islands in 

 the Pacific Ocean for which an intensive biological survey is under way. 

 The file is proving to be a time saver for the scientist. One scholar 

 came half way around the world to see the wonderful tool that had 

 responded so promptly and well to his query for information. 



BRANCH LIBRARIES 



Trade-catalog literature of approximately 200,000 volumes received 

 from Columbia University was unpacked and placed on shelves, and 

 later in the year the trade-catalog collection from the Baker Library, 

 Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University, was 

 processed (2,573 pieces) and made available. The addition of these 

 two collections to the trade-catalog literature already held by the 

 Institution makes the Smithsonian Library holdings in this field most 

 comprehensive if not preeminent. The Library is grateful to the 

 Columbia and Harvard Libraries for their gifts. In January the 

 installation of a Xerox 914 machine in the Museum of History and 

 Technology Branch Library led to improved and speedier service. 



The Patent Office Library continued to be generous in transferring 

 valuable back files of serials and materials for historical research to the 

 Museum of History and Technology Branch Library. The outstand- 

 ing item in the transfer this year is the Academie des Sciences' Descrip- 

 tion des Arts et Metiers (Paris, 1761-89, 45 vols.), one of two complete 

 sets in existence. 



On October 18, 1964, after 12 years during which there was no 

 full-time librarian, William B. Walker was appointed librarian of the 

 National Collection of Fine Arts/National Portrait Gallery Branch 

 Library. The most important aspects of renewed activity during the 

 year have been the addition of a second staff member, the library 

 assistant, in January 1965, and the move of the library collection to 

 more spacious and attractive quarters in April. 




380 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



The Entomology Branch Library has been without a librarian since 

 A. James Spohn's transfer to the Central Reference Staff in October. 

 Carl J. Drake presented to the Library his personal collection of approx- 

 imately 1,000 books plus assorted journals and reprints, mainly on 

 Hemiptera, which he collected over a span of more than 50 years. 



STAFF ACTIVITIES AND CHANGES 



Ruth E. Blanchard, librarian of the Smithsonian for the past 7 years, 

 was appointed special assistant to the Secretary for Library of Congress 

 and Smithsonian matters on November 16, 1964. 



Mrs. Mary A. Huffer was designated acting librarian, and Jean 

 Chandler Smith transferred from the Department of the Interior 

 Library on January 18, 1965, to become assistant librarian. Mrs. 

 Mary C. Quinn was appointed to the new position, secretary to the 

 librarian, on February 21, 1965. 



Janet Dickson, chief of the catalog section since October 1959, 

 transferred to the Library of the Department of Health, Education, and 

 Welfare on November 21, 1964. Clarice M. Barker has been acting 

 chief of the catalog section since that time. Mrs. Vija Karklins was 

 appointed senior cataloger in April 1965 to replace Mrs. E. C. Bach- 

 rach, who transferred to the National Agricultural Library in Decem- 

 ber. Mrs. Angeline Ashford was appointed junior cataloger in 

 February to fill the vacancy created when Salavador Waller left to 

 become librarian at the D.C. General Hospital in January. Mrs. 

 Maria Bazylewicz transferred in April 1965 from the section of numis- 

 matics in the Museum of History and Technology to fill the position 

 of library assistant. Carol B. Boyd was appointed library assistant 

 on September 9, 1964. 



In the reference and circulation section the following staff changes 

 took place during the past year : Mrs. Gloria Mauney resigned August 

 28, 1964, after being with the library for 9 years, to take a position with 

 the D.C. School System. A. James Spohn, entomology librarian, was 

 detailed part time and later transferred full time to the Central Library 

 reference staff. Mrs. Sue Chen was appointed on August 15, 1964, to 

 the newly created position of reference librarian. Thomas Harper 

 was appointed on June 27, 1965, as loan-desk librarian to replace 

 Thomas Wilding, who had transferred to the acquisitions section. 



Mildred D. Raitt was promoted to assistant chief of the acquisitions 

 section on February 28, 1965. Mrs. Shirley S. Harren transferred to 

 the National Collection of Fine Arts /National Portrait Gallery staff 

 on January 3, 1965, and, to fill the vacancy thus created, Thomas 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION LIBRARY 381 



Wilding was made exchange librarian on March 28, 1965. Mrs. 

 Jeannette L. Mills was appointed clerk-typist on September 5, 1964. 

 All the vexing problems associated with so many personnel changes 

 and vacancies, as can be seen from reading the above, have plagued 

 the Library during the past year. 



The staff continued to attend special courses and seminars for growth 

 and development. Participation was active in professional organiza- 

 tions and in attendance at the annual conferences of the Special 

 Libraries Association and American Library Association. 



The following papers by staff members of the Library appeared in 

 various journals : 



Goodwin, Jack S., compiler. 



Current Bibliography in History and Technology (1963). Technology and 

 Culture, 6: 346-374, 1965. 

 Smith, Jean Chandler. 



Bibliography on the Metabolism of Endoparasites Exclusive of Arthropods, 

 1951-1962. Experimental Parasitology 16: 236-290, 1965. 



NOTABLE GIFTS, FISCAL YEAR 1965 



Academie des sciences, Paris. Descriptions des arts et metiers faites approuvees 

 par messieurs de l'Academie. 1761-89. 45 vols. Transfer from Patent 

 Office Library. 



Blatchley, Willis S. On the coleoptera known to occur in Indiana. 1910, from 



Mrs. Lewis H. Weld, Arlington, Va. 

 Breeskin, Adelyn D. The graphic work of Mary Cassatt; a catalogue raisonne. 



N.Y., 1948. Gift of the author. 

 Brewster, David. The life of Sir Isaac Newton. 1831, and 33 other volumes 



on engineering, art, history, and many other subjects, from Mrs. Carolyn 



Edwards, Glen Echo, Md. 

 Brinkley F. The art of Japan. 2 vols. 1901, from Mrs. Herbert Campbell, 



Washington, D.C. 

 Bushell, Stephen W. Chinese art. 1914, from Mrs. Herbert Campbell. 



Washington, D.C. 

 A collection of about 2,573 trade catalogs, post 1900, from the Baker Library, 



Harvard University, Graduate School of Business Administration. 

 A collection of catalogs, covering about 400 different concerns, primarily 



heating and plumbing, filling about 75 linear feet of shelf space and number- 

 ing in the thousands, from Clifford T. L. Cryer, Denville, N.J., and 



John Gordon L. Cryer, Newark, N.J. 

 A collection of eleven books on covered bridges from Mrs. Samuel Reed, 



Peoria, 111. 

 A collection of 79 books on numismatics of the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries 



from Dr. and Mrs. Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli, Washington, D.C. 

 A collection of yearbooks, handbooks, and journals on various sports, numbering 



about 1,000 from the estate of Stephen Mahoney. Gift of Mrs. Stephen 



Mahoney, Washington, D.C. 




382 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Comstock, John N. The wings of insects. 1918, from Mrs. Lewis H. Weld, 

 Arlington, Va. 



du Pont and allied families. 1965, from Pierre S. du Pont, Wilmington, Del. 



Goldwater, Barry Morris. The face of Arizona. 1 964, from Senator Barry M. 

 Goldwater, Scottsdale, Ariz. 



Hattori, H. Myxomycetes of Nasu District. Revised edition, 1964, from Em- 

 peror Hirohito through the Ambassador of Japan to the United States. 



Hirohito, Emperor of Japan. Flora Nasuensis, additions and emendations. 

 1 963, from Emperor Hirohito through the Ambassador of Japan to the 

 United States. 



Kalakaua. The legends and myths of Hawaii, edited by R. M. Daggett. 



1888, from Mrs. Herbert Campbell, Washington, D.G. 

 Ketterer, Roman Norbert. 6 catalogs of contemporary art. Gift of the author. 



Lugano, Switzerland. 



National Society of Colonial Dames of America. Delaware Chapter. Portraits 

 in Delaware, 1700-1850. Wilmington, 1951. Gift of the Society. 



Reynolds, G. William. New World heroes, Lincoln and Garfield. 1892, from 



Miss Elizabeth Spratt, Sydney, Australia. 

 Roebling, John A. Report on the Niagara Railway Suspension Bridge. 1855, 



from Mrs. Milburn Truitt, Fort Wayne, Ind. 



Viereck, Henry L. Hymenoptera of Connecticut. 1916, from Mrs. Lewis H. 

 Weld, Arlington, Va. 



Whitehall, Walter Muir. The arts in early American history. (Bibliography 

 by Wendell and Jane Garrett.) Chapel Hill, 1965. Gift of the Institute 

 of Early American History and Culture, Williamsburg, Va. 



Williston, Samuel W. Manual of North American diptera. 3d ed. 1908, 

 from Mrs. Lewis H. Weld, Arlington, Va. 



SUMMARIZED STATISTICS OF ACTIVITIES 



ACQUISITIONS 



Items (pieces) received: 7963-64 1964-65 



Exchange and purchase 69, 584 



Gift and transfer 9, 656 



Miscellaneous 3, 260 



Total pieces 120, 008 82, 500 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION LIBRARY 383 



Disposition of items (pieces) not retained: 



Library of Congress 60, 977 33, 323 



National Library of Medicine 2, 245 1, 263 



National Agricultural Library 1,406 95 



U.S. Book Exchange 3, 014 1, 220 



Other Federal libraries and agencies 389 1, 548 



Total pieces 68, 031 37, 449 



New material procured: 

 Books purchased 

 Subscriptions placed 

 New exchanges arranged 

 Specific publications requested as gifts or exchange 



Total pieces 6, 927 6, 498 



CATALOGING 

 Volumes cataloged: 7963-64 1964-65 



Smithsonian Main Library including Museum of Natural 



History Branch 

 Bureau of American Ethnology (SOA after March 1, 1965) 

 Department of Entomology 

 Museum of History and Technology 

 National Air Museum 

 National Armed Forces Advisory Board 

 National Collection of Fine Arts 

 National Portrait Gallery 

 National Zoological Park 

 Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 

 Smithsonian Office of Anthropology 

 Smithsonian Radiation Biology Laboratory 



Total (full cataloging) 



Trade catalogs (Museum of History and Technology) 

 Simplified cataloging 



Total new material cataloged 

 Volumes recataloged 



Total volumes cataloged 11, 257 12, 882 



Catalog cards Bled 34, 718 46, 808 



Number of serials recorded 35, 042 32, 572 



Binding and repair: 



Volumes bound 5,175 5,259 



Volumes repaired in the Library 1, 859 1, 761 



•Fleure adjusted. 




384 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 

 CIRCULATION STATISTICS 



Smithsonian books circulated: 



Central Library 



Museum of History and Technology 



Entomology 



Smithsonian Office of Anthropology 



National Collection of Fine Arts/National Portrait Gallery 



Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 



Total 



Library of Congress books circulated by: 



Central Library 



Museum of History and Technology 



Total 



Interlibrary loan books circulated by: 



Central Library 



Museum of History and Technology 



Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 



Total 



Total books circulated 



1963-64 1964-65 



3,313 4,216 



REFERENCE SERVICES 

 Reference searches: 



Questions received in person or by telephone 

 Central Library 



Museum of History and Technology 

 Entomology 



Smithsonian Office of Anthropology 

 National Collection of Fine Arts/National Portrait 



Gallery 

 Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 



Total 



Questions received by mail: 



Central Library 



Museum of History and Technology 

 National Collection of Fine Arts/National Portrait 

 Gallery 



Total 



Total reference requests handled 



•Bureau of American Ethnology. 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION LIBRARY 



385 



56, 289 3, 601 



59, 890 



TABLE 2— CATALOGED ACCESSIONS TO THE LIBRARY IN FISCAL 



YEAR 1965 



Library 

 Smithsonian Central Library 



Branch Libraries: 



Museum of Natural History Libraries 



Museum of History and Technology 

 Trade Catalog Collection 



Smithsonian Office of Anthropology (formerly 

 Bureau of American Ethnology and Depart- 

 ment of Anthropology, U.S.N.M.) 



Entomology 



Radiation Biology Laboratory (formerly Radia- 

 tion and Organisms) 



National Air Museum 



National Collection of Fine Arts 



National Portrait Gallery 



National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board 



National Zoological Park 



Canal Zone Biological Area 



Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 

 Cambridge, Mass. 

 Washington, D.C. 



Miscellaneous Collections 



Total 



Technical Report Collection — S.A.O. Cambridge, 



Mass. 8, 000 



179,382 11,936 *191, 318 

 8,000 



*No longer includes uncataloged or unbound serials. 

 "Figures not available. 





Publications and Information 





Publications and Information 



Paul H. Oehser, Chief and Public Relations Officer 



The editorial and publications division expanded its operations in 

 fiscal 1965 in full support of the Institution's newly defined emphasis 

 on research and education. As the Smithsonian continues to fulfill 

 its mission of "diffusing knowledge," the publishing arm of the Insti- 

 tution plays a vital role in communicating research results to the world. 

 Operating as the Smithsonian Press, responsibilities and activities of 

 the editorial and publications division moved forward in four main 

 programs: 



1. Editing, designing, and publishing of scholarly books and 

 reports on explorations and research by staff members and collabora- 

 tors of the Institution in the fields of science, history, and art, along 

 with publications of a more popular nature, such as museum guide- 

 books, information leaflets, and art catalogs. 



2. Control and distribution of Smithsonian publications. 



3. Day-to-day dissemination of information to the press and to 

 the inquiring public. 



4. Printing of materials of a current and emergency nature, such 

 as museum labels and invitations and announcements of Smithsonian 

 events, by a branch of the Government Printing Office located at the 

 Institution for this purpose. 



PUBLICATIONS PROGRAM 



One hundred and thirty publications appeared under the Smith- 

 sonian imprint during the past year in its various series, as listed 

 below. These publications are issued partly from federally appropri- 

 ated funds (Smithsonian Reports and publications of the National 

 Museum, the Bureau of American Ethnology, the National Air 

 Museum, and the Astrophysical Observatory) and partly from private 

 endowment funds (Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, publi- 

 cations of the Freer Gallery of Art, and some special publications). 

 The Institution also publishes under the auspices of the Freer Gallery 

 of Art the series Ars Orientalis, which appears under the joint imprint 

 of the University of Michigan and the Smithsonian Institution. In 



389 




390 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



addition the Smithsonian also publishes for sale to visitors guidebooks, 

 information pamphlets, postcards, folders, and popular publications 

 on scientific and historical subjects related to its important exhibits 

 and collections. 



Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 



In this series, under the immediate direction of Mrs. Nancy Link 

 Powars, the following papers were issued: 



VOLUME 145 



No. 8. Foraminifera from late Pleistocene clay near Waterville, Maine, by 

 Martin A. Buzas. 30 pp. 5 pis. 4 figs. (Publ.4596.) March 1,1965. ($1.) 



VOLUME 146 



No. 4. Evolutionary trends in the avian genus Clamator, by Herbert Friedmann. 



127 pp. 14 figs. (Publ. 4532.) October 30, 1964. ($2.) 

 No. 5. Some behavior patterns of platyrrhine monkeys. 1. The night 



monkey (Aotus trivirgatus), by M. Moynihan. 84 pp. 22 figs. (Publ. 



4533.) October 23, 1964. ($1.25.) 

 No. 6. A revision of the American vultures of the genus Cathartes, by Alexander 



Wetmore. 18 pp. (Publ. 4539.) August 14, 1964. (50 cents.) 

 No. 7. A new species of marine pennate diatom from Honolulu Harbor, by 



Paul S. Conger. 5 pp. 1 pi. (Publ. 4593.) October 23, 1964. (40 cents.) 



VOLUME 148 



No. 1 . A new theory identifying the locale of Columbus's light, landfall, and 



landing, by Ruth G. Durlacher Wolper. 41 pp. 12 figs. (Publ. 4534.) 



September 11, 1964. (75 cents.) 

 No. 2. The brachiopod superfamily Stenoscismatacea, by Richard E. Grant. 



192 pp. 24 pis. 34 figs. (Publ. 4569.) April 1, 1965. ($4.50.) 

 No. 3. Upper Cambrian trilobite faunas of northeastern Tennessee, by Franco 



Rasetti. 127 pp. 21 pis. 2 figs. (Publ. 4598.) June 10, 1965. ($3.) 

 No. 4. Planktonic Foraminifera from the western North Atlantic, by Richard 



Cifelli. 36 pp. 9 pis. 4 figs. (Publ. 4599.) February 23, 1965. ($1.) 

 No. 5. Hexahedrites, by Edward P. Henderson. 41 pp. 4 pis. 8 figs. (Publ. 



4601.) June 14, 1965. ($1.) 



VOLUME 149 



No. 1. The distribution and abundance of Foraminifera in Long Island Sound, 



by Martin A. Buzas. 89 pp. 4 pis. 22 figs. (Publ. 4604.) May 25, 1965. 



($1.50.) 

 No. 2. A study of the early Tertiary condylarthran mammal Meniscotherium, 



by C. Lewis Gazin. 99 pp. 11 pis. 9 figs. (Publ. 4605.) May 10, 1965. 



($2.) 




PUBLICATIONS AND INFORMATION 391 



No. 3. The relationships of Quemisia gravis (Rodentia: PHeptaxodontidae), by 

 Clayton E. Ray. 12 pp. 1 pi. 2 figs. (Publ. 4606.) April 28, 1965. (50 

 cents.) 



Smithsonian Annual Reports 



REPORT FOR 1963 



The complete volume of the Annual Report of the Board of Regents 

 for 1963 was received from the printer on December 7, 1964. 



Annual Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution showing 

 the operations, expenditures, and condition of the Institution for the year 

 ended June 30, 1963. xii+595 pp., illustr. (Publ. 4530.) 



The general appendix contained the following papers (Publ. 4570- 

 4589): 



The solar system, by Sir Bernard Lovell. 



Advances in astronomical technology, by Aden B. Meinel. 



The analysis of starlight, by Bernard Pagel. 



Astronomical photography from the stratosphere, by Martin Schwarzchild. 



The Smithsonian's satellite-tracking program: Its history and organization — 



part 2, by E. Nelson Hayes. 

 The neutrinos, by Melvin Schwartz. 



The antibiotics from a botanical viewpoint, by Kenneth L. Jones. 

 Atomic and other wastes in the sea, by I. Eugene Wallen. 

 What is cybernetics?, by Donald M. MacKay. 



The use of the electron microscope in the study of fossils, by William W. Hay. 

 Color changes in animals, by D. B. Carlisle. 

 History of the Corbin Preserve, by Richard H. Manville. 

 The Southern Ocean: A potential for coral studies, by Donald F. Squires. 

 The promise of underwater archeology, by George F. Bass. 

 Plants in the Arctic-Alpine environment, by Stanwyn G. Shetler. 

 Concerning whales and museums, by A. E. Parr. 

 Tropical subsistence agriculture in Latin America: Some neglected aspects and 



implications, by Raymond E. Crist. 

 An archeological reconnaissance in Hadhramaut, South Arabia — A preliminary 



report, by Gus W. Van Beek, Glen H. Cole, and Albert Jamme, W. F. 

 The corrosion products of metal antiquities, by Rutherford J. Gettens. 

 Religious art East and West, by Benjamin Rowland. 



REPORT FOR 1964 



The report of the Secretary, which will form part of the 1964 Annual 

 Report of the Board of Regents, was issued January 28, 1965. 



Report of the Secretary and the financial report of the Executive Committee of 

 the Board of Regents for the year ended June 30, 1964. xiii + 293 pp. 

 14 pis. (Publ. 4595.) 




392 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Special Publications 



James Means and the problem of manflight during the period 1882-1920, by 

 James Howard Means, M.D. xi + 143 pp. 29 pis. 15 figs. (Publ. 4526.) 

 July 21, 1964. ($3.) 



Communications in space. 23 pp., illustr. (Publ. 4568.) August 13, 1964. 

 (50 cents.) 



Masters of space, by Philip S. Hopkins. 32 pp., illustr. (Publ. 4590.) October 

 23, 1964. (50 cents.) 



Research opportunities. 65 pp. (Publ. 4603.) December 9, 1964. (50 cents.) 



Training by simulation, by Alan B. Shepard, Jr. 13 pp. (Publ. 4597.) Janu- 

 ary 8, 1965. (25 cents.) 



Opportunities in oceanography, by E. John Long. 33 pp. 46 figs. (Publ. 

 4537.) July 29, 1964. (50 cents.) 



A study relating to the establishment of a National Armed Forces Museum. 

 23 pp., illustr. (Publ. 4611.) April 15, 1965. 



History under the sea, by Mendel Peterson. 108 pp. 56 pis. (Publ. 4538.) 

 April 26, 1965. ($3.) 



The national aeronautical collections, by Paul E. Garber. 10th ed. 168 pp., 

 illustr. (Publ. 4255.) May 27, 1965. ($2.) 



Smithsonian Institution directory. 99 pp. (Publ. 4638.) June 30, 1965. 



Reprints 



A biographical sketch of James Smithson. 20 pp., illustr. (Publ. 2276.) 

 October 21, 1964. (50 cents.) 



The gown of Mrs. John F. Kennedy. [Supplement to "The Dresses of the 

 First Ladies of the White House," by Margaret W. Brown, published by 

 the Smithsonian Institution in 1952. (Publ. 4060).] September 25, 1964. 

 (50 cents.) 



Smithsonian physical tables. Prepared by William Elmer Forsythe. Ninth 

 revised edition, third reprint. (Publ. 4169.) March 1, 1965. ($10.) 



Lichen handbook, by Mason E. Hale, Jr. 178 pp. 20 pis. 58 figs. (Publ. 

 4434.) August 18, 1964. ($4.) 



Brief guide to the museums in the Washington area. 39 pp., illustr. (Publ. 

 4528.) August 25, 1964. (25 cents.) 



Opportunities in oceanography, by E. John Long. 33 pp. 46 figs. (Publ. 

 4537.) Revised edition, April 1965. (50 cents.) 



The Smithsonian Institution. 55 pp. (Publ. 4600.) Revised edition, Decem- 

 ber 24, 1964. (50 cents.) 



United States National Museum Publications 



The editorial work of the National Museum continued during the 

 year under the immediate direction of John S. Lea, assistant chief of 

 the division. The following publications were issued: 




PUBLICATIONS AND INFORMATION 393 



REPORT 



The United States National Museum annual report for the year ended June 30, 

 1964. Pp. viii+215, illustr., January 23, 1965. 



BULLETINS 



161, part 4 (end of volume). The Foraminifera of the tropical Pacific collec- 

 tions of the "Albatross," 1899-1900, by Ruth Todd. Pp. v+139, 28 pis., 

 January 26, 1965. 



230. The bark canoes and skin boats of North America, by Edwin Tappan 

 Adney and Howard I. Chapelle. Pp. xiv+242, 224 figs., September 8, 

 1964. 



231. Early American scientific instruments and their makers, by Silvio A. 

 Bedini. Pp. xii + 184, 86 figs., August 14, 1964. 



238. Early engineering reminiscences (1 81 5-40) of George Escol Sellers, edited 

 by Eugene S. Ferguson. Pp. xix+203, 84 figs., February 15, 1965. 



239. The Recent Mollusca of Augustus Addison Gould, by Richard I. Johnson. 

 Pp. v+182, 45 pis., July 28, 1964. 



240. Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology: Papers 

 34-44, by members of the staff and others. 



Paper 34. The 1893 Duryea automobile, by Don H. Berkebile. Pp. 1-28, 



30 figs., October 13, 1964. 

 Paper 35. The Borghesi astronomical clock, by Silvio A. Bedini. Pp. 



29-76, 35 figs., November 13, 1964. 

 Paper 36. The engineering contributions of Wendel Bollman, by Robert 



M. Vogel. Pp. 77-104, 24 figs., November 13, 1964. 

 Paper 37. Screw-thread cutting by the master-screw method since 1480, 



by Edwin A. Battison. Pp. 105-120, 23 figs., October 29, 1964. 

 Paper 38. The earliest electromagnetic instruments, by Robert A. Chip- 

 man. Pp. 121-136, 8 figs., November 13, 1964. 

 Paper 39. Fulton's "steam battery": Blockship and catamaran, by 



Howard I. Chapelle. Pp. 137-176, 20 figs., November 24, 1964. 

 Paper 40. History of phosphorus, by Eduard Farber. Pp. 177-200, 23 



figs., March 8, 1965. 

 Paper 41. Tunnel engineering — a museum treatment, by Robert M. 



Vogel. Pp. 201-240, 44 figs., October 29, 1964. 

 Paper 42. The "Pioneer": Light passenger locomotive of 1851 in the 



Museum of History and Technology, by John H. White. Pp. 241-268, 



30 figs., November 17, 1964. 

 Paper 43. History of the Division of Medical Sciences, by Sami Hamarneh. 



Pp. 269-300, 24 figs., November 24, 1964. 

 Paper 44. Development of gravity pendulums in the 19th century, by 



Victor F. Lenzen and Robert P. Multhauf. Pp. 301-348, 34 figs., May 



14, 1965. 



241. Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology: Papers 

 45-51, by members of the staff and others. 



789-427—66 38 




394 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Paper 45. Political campaign torches, by Herbert R. Collins. Pp. 1-44, 



95 figs., December 22, 1964. 

 Paper 46. Bryan the campaigner, by Keith Melder. Pp. 45-80, 19 figs., 



May 6, 1965. 

 Paper 48. United States patents, 1790 to 1870: New uses for old ideas, 



by Peter C. Welsh. Pp. 109-152, 57 figs., May 5, 1965. 

 Paper 50. Red Cross ambulance of 1898 in the Museum of History and 



Technology, by Herbert R. Collins. Pp. 165-176, 8 figs., April 14, 1965. 



242. Tanning in the United States to 1850: A brief history, by Peter C. Welsh. 

 Pp. ix + 99, 28 figs., December 21, 1964. 



243. Lacebugs of the world: A catalog (Hemiptera: Tingidae), by Carl J. 

 Drake and Florence A. Ruhoff. Pp. viii + 634, 57 pis., 6 figs., March 8, 

 1965. 



CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE NATIONAL HERBARIUM 



From volume 34 — 



Part 3. Systematic anatomy and ontogeny of the stem in Passifloraceae, by 



Edward S. Ayensu and William L. Stern. Pp. 45-74, 12 pis., August 21, 



1964. 

 From volume 35 — 

 Part 6 (end of volume). Cacao and its allies, a taxonomic revision of the genus 



Theobroma, by Jose Cuatrecasas. Pp. 379-614, 12 pis., 44 figs., August 21, 



1964. 

 From volume 36 — 

 Part 4. Studies on Parmelia subgenus Parmelia, by Mason E. Hale, Jr., and Syo 



Kurokawa. Pp. 121-192, 9 pis., 1 fig., August 26, 1964. 

 Part 5. A monograph of Parmelia subgenus Amphigymnia, by Mason E. Hale, Jr. 



Pp. 193-358, 16 pis., 29 figs., April 8, 1965. 



PROCEEDINGS 



From volume 1 1 4 — 



No. 3475. Moths of the family Acrolophidae in America north of Mexico 



(Microlepidoptera), by Frank F. Hasbrouck. Pp. 487-706, 219 figs.. 



October 15, 1964. 

 From volume 115 — 



Title page, table of contents, and index. Pp. i-v-f 633-654, March 1, 1965. 

 No. 3492. The Jambeli culture of south coastal Ecuador, by Emilio Estrada, 



Betty J. Meggers, and Clifford Evans. Pp. 483-558, 12 pis., 42 figs., 



September 25, 1964. 

 No. 3493. A revision of the carcharhinid shark genera Scoliodon, Loxodon, and 



Rhizoprionodon, by Victor G. Springer. Pp. 559-632, 2 pis., 14 figs., 



September 1, 1964. 

 From volume 1 1 6 — 

 No. 3494. A review of the ophidioid fish genus Oligopus with the description of 



a new species from West Africa, by Daniel M. Cohen. Pp. 1-22, 5 pis., 



October 13, 1964. 




PUBLICATIONS AND INFORMATION 395 



No. 3495. North American Stenomidae (Lepidoptera: Gelechioidea), by W. 



Donald Duckworth. Pp. 23-72, 4 pis., 45 figs., October 27, 1964. 

 No. 3496. A survey of vertebral numbers in sharks, by Victor G. Springer and 



J. A. F. Garrick. Pp. 73-96, 1 pi., October 16, 1964. 

 No. 3497. Neotropical Microlepidoptera, IV. A new genus of Stenomidae 



with descriptions of four new species (Lepidoptera: Gelechioidea). Pp. 



97-114, 5 figs., September 11, 1964. 

 No. 3498. One new species and two redescriptions of catfishes of the South 



American callichthyid genus Corydoras, by Stanley H. Weitzman. Pp. 



115-126, 6 figs., October 13, 1964. 

 No. 3499. Osteology and relationships of South American characid fishes of 



subfamilies Lebiasininae and Erythrininae with special reference to subtribe 



Nannostomina, by Stanley H. Weitzman. Pp. 127-170, 10 figs., October 



13, 1964. 

 No. 3500. Three new species of frogfishes from the Indian and Pacific Oceans 



with notes on other species (family Antennariidae), by Leonard P. Schultz. 



Pp. 171-182, 3 pis., September 1, 1964. 

 No. 3501. Neotropical Microlepidoptera, V. Synopsis of the species of the 



genus Proeulia from central Chile (Lepidoptera: Tortricidae), by Nicholas S. 



Obraztsov. Pp. 183-196, 9 pis., October 29, 1964. 

 No. 3502. Neotropical Microlepidoptera, VI. Genera Orsotricha Meyrick and 



Palinorsa Meyrick (Gelechiidae, Oecophoridae), by J. F. Gates Clarke. 



Pp. 197-204, 1 pi., 4 figs., November 23, 1964. 

 No. 3503. Contributions to the knowledge of the Hemerobiidae of western 



North America (Neuroptera), by Waro Nakahara. Pp. 205-222, 1 pi., 



4 figs., January 26, 1965. 

 No. 3504. A contribution to the study of the genus Sphaerocera Latreille in 



Central and South America (Diptera: Sphaeroceridae), by O. W. Richards. 



Pp. 223-242, 28 figs., April 5, 1965. 

 No. 3505. Herpetology of the Zuni Mountains region, northwestern New 



Mexico, by Frederick R. Gehlbach. Pp. 243-332, 4 pis., 10 figs., February 



26, 1965. 

 No. 3506. Review of the genus Cerceris in America north of Mexico (Hymenop- 



tera: Sphecidae), by Herman A. Scullen. Pp. 333-548, 1 pi.. 182 figs.. 



May 25, 1965. 

 No. 3507. North American moths of the genus Swammerdamia (Lepidoptera: 



Yponomeutidae), by W. Donald Duckworth. Pp. 549-556, 3 figs., May 



25, 1965. 



Bureau of American Ethnology Publications 



The editorial work continued under the immediate direction of Mrs. 

 Eloise B. Edelen. The following publications were issued: 



ANNUAL REPORT 



Eighty-first Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 1963-1964. 

 ii + 31 pp.1965. 




396 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



BULLETINS 



Bulletin 191. Anthropological Papers Nos. 68-74. iii-f 425 pp., 104 pis., 55 

 figs., 13 maps. 1964. 

 No. 68. The prehistory of Panama Viejo, by Leo P. Biese. 

 No. 69. The language of Santa Ana Pueblo, by Irvine Davis. 

 No. 70. Observations on certain ancient tribes of the Northern Appa- 

 lachian Province, by Bernard G. Hoffman. 

 No. 71. El Limon, an early tomb site in Code Province, Panama, by 



Matthew W. and Marion Stirling. 

 No. 72. Archeological notes on Almirante Bay, Bocas del Toro, Panama, 



by Matthew W. and Marion Stirling. 

 No. 73. The archeology of Taboga, Uraba, and Taboguilla Islands, 



Panama, by Matthew W. and Marion Stirling. 

 No. 74. Iroquois masks and maskmaking at Onondaga, by Jean Hendry. 

 Bulletin 192. Archeology of the Yakutat Bay area, Alaska, by Frederica de 



Laguna et al. xi-f-245 pp. ? 19 pl s . } 25 figs., 7 maps. 1964. 

 Bulletin 193. Archeological investigations in the Parita and Santa Maria 

 zones of Panama, by John Ladd. xii-f-291 pp., 25 pis., 68 figs., 2 maps, 

 14 charts. 1964. 



ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY PUBLICATIONS 



Publication during the year in the series Smithsonian Contributions 

 to Astrophysics follows: 



VOLUME 8 



No. 4. The velocity of faint meteors, by Gerald S. Hawkins, Bertil-Anders 



Lindblad, and Richard B. Southworth. Pp. 133-139, 3 figs., September 



2, 1964. 

 No. 5. On the luminous efficiency of meteors, by Franco Verniani. Pp. 



141-172, 8 figs., June 17, 1965. 

 No. 6. Second catalog of hourly meteor rates, by Charles P. Olivier. Pp. 



171-180, May 11, 1965. 

 No. 7. Meteor geomagnetic effects, by Sydney Chapman and Attia A. Ashour. 



Pp. 181-197, 4 figs., June 9, 1965. 

 No. 8. The Henbury meteorite craters, by Paul W. Hodge. Pp. 199-213, 17 



figs., April 20, 1965. 



National Air Museum Publications 



The following monographs were issued during the year in the new 

 series Smithsonian Annals of Flight: 



VOLUME 1 



No. 1. The first nonstop coast-to-coast flight and the historic T-2 airplane, 

 by Louis S. Casey. Pp. x-f-1-90, 44 figs., December 17, 1964. 




PUBLICATIONS AND INFORMATION 397 



No. 2. The first airplane diesel engine: Packard model DR-980 of 1928, by 

 Robert B. Meyer. Pp. vii+48, 38 figs., April 30, 1965. 



National Collection of Fine Arts Publications 

 The following catalogs were issued during the year: 



Stuart Davis memorial exhibition. 98 pp., illustr. (Publ. 4614.) 1965. 

 Traveling Exhibitions Catalog, 1965-1966. 61 pp., illustr. (Publ. 4609.) 



1965. 

 Sketches by Constable from the Victoria and Albert Museum. 79 pp., illustr. 



(Publ. 4610.) 1965. 

 Medieval frescoes from Yugoslavia. 32 pp., illustr. (Publ. 4594.) 1965. 

 Brazilian tapestries of Genaro de Carvalho. 4 pp. (Publ. 4592.) 1964. 

 American primitive watercolors. 16 pp. (Publ. 4591.) 1964. (25 cents.) 

 Watercolors by Pop Hart. 4 pp. (Publ. 4607.) 1964. 

 Old master prints. 4 pp. 1964. 

 Brass rubbings from England. 4 pp. 1964. 

 Eugene Berman: New stage designs. 4 pp. 1964. 



Freer Gallery of Art Publications 



Hokusai paintings and drawings in the Freer Gallery of Art. 38 pp. 35 figs. + 



2 color. (Publ. 4419.) Revised edition, 1965. ($1.) 

 James McNeill Whistler: A biographical outline, illustrated from the collections 



of the Freer Gallery of Art, by Burns A. Stubbs. 29 pp. 28 pis. Freer 



Gallery of Art Occasional Papers, vol. 1, No. 4. (Publ. 3994.) 1965 



(reprint of 1950 edition). ($1.) 



American Historical Association Reports 



The annual reports of the American Historical Association are trans- 

 mitted by the Association to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institu- 

 tion and are by him communicated to Congress, as provided in the act 

 of incorporation of the Association. The following reports were issued 

 during the year: 



Annual report of the American Historical Association for the year 1963. Vol. 1. 

 Proceedings. xxvii4-302 pp. December 15, 1964. 



Report of the National Society, Daughters of the American 



r.evolution 



In accordance with law, the manuscript of the 67th annual report 

 of the National Society, Daughters of the American Revolution, was 

 transmitted to Congress on March 19, 1965. 1 



1 D.A.R. reports are published as Senate documents and are not available from the Smithsonian 

 Institution. 




398 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



DISTRIBUTION PROGRAM 



Requests for publications and information showed a substantial 

 increase during the year. The Publications Distribution Section, under 

 the immediate supervision of Mrs. Eileen M. McCarthy, received 

 41,014 requests for publications from foreign and domestic libraries, 

 universities, research institutions, educational establishments, and 

 individuals throughout the world. 



A total of 1,082,479 publications, miscellaneous items, and informa- 

 tion leaflets were distributed during fiscal 1965. 



The following titles were issued and sent to libraries as a result of the 

 Institution's participation in the National Science Foundation translation 

 program : 



Berg, L. S. 



Freshwater fishes of the U.S.S.R. and adjacent countries, vols. 2 and 3. 

 Borutsku, E. V. 



Freshwater Harpacticoida. Fauna of U.S.S.R., Crustacea, vol. 3, No. 4. 

 Byalynitskii-Birulya, A. A. 



Scorpions. Fauna of Russia and adjacent countries, Arachnoidea, vol. 1. 



Arthrogastric Arachnids of Caucasia. Part 1 , Scorpions. 

 Jerzmanska, Anna. 



Ichthyofauna from the Jasto Shales of Sobniow. Acta Palaeontologica 



Polonica, vol. 5, No. 4. 

 Mischenko, L. L. 



Locusts and grasshoppers. Fauna of U.S.S.R., Orthoptera, vol. 4, No. 2. 

 Nikol'skii, A. M. 



Ophidia. Fauna of Russia and adjacent countries, reptiles, vol. 2. 

 Tarasov, S. V. 



Technology of watch production. 

 Telenga, N. A. 



Braconidai. Fauna of the U.S.S.R., Hymenoptera, vol. 5, No. 4. 

 Shishkin, B. K., editor. 



Flora of the U.S.S.R., vol. 3. 



INFORMATION PROGRAM 



With the growth of the Institution and the inauguration of many 

 new programs, the day-to-day business of keeping the press and other 

 communications media informed concerning the Smithsonian became 

 highly accelerated. So much so that on July 20, 1964, a full-time 

 press officer, George Berklacy, joined the staff. During the year 

 stepped-up information activities included: 



1. Issuance of more than 100 press releases on noteworthy events 

 and scientific researches. 




PUBLICATIONS AND INFORMATION 399 



2. Distribution of 10 news features to specialized media. 



3. Answering some 500 written inquiries and more than 1,500 

 telephone calls for specific information. 



4. Arranging and holding press conferences in advance of major 

 exhibitions or activities. 



5. Giving information to approximately 300 visitors, many of them 

 newsmen and writers, who sought knowledge concerning the work, 

 facilities, history, and resources of the Institution. 



6. Installation of "Dial-a-Satellite" service. This tape-recorded 

 message was inaugurated as a public service to furnish listeners within 

 a radius of 150 miles of the Smithsonian with up-to-date information 

 on the location of satellites and other astronomical phenomena. 

 More than 700 individuals dialed daily for the message. 



PRINTING PROGRAM 



The Smithsonian Print Shop, a branch of the Government Printing 

 Office under the immediate supervision of Murray C. Ballard, operated 

 at more than maximum capacity during the past year, completing 

 704 individual printing jobs, or approximately 28 percent more than 

 the preceding year These assignments included labels, forms, invita- 

 tions, programs, leaflets, flyers, announcements, and other printing of 

 a current and emergency nature. 



OTHER ACTIVITIES 



For the first time the Smithsonian participated with a publications 

 exhibit at the annual meeting of the American Association for the 

 Advancement of Science in Montreal, December 27-30, 1964. The 

 exhibit also encompassed the work of the Smithsonian in general with 

 particular emphasis on its research and museum programs. Not only 

 did the chief of the division attend the Montreal meeting, but he and 

 two editors in the division represented the Institution at the annual 

 meeting of the Association of American University Presses held the 

 latter part of May in Lexington, Ky. 



The Smithsonian Institution and T.F.H. Publications, Inc., of Jersey 

 City, N.J., in May 1963 entered into an agreement to establish a re- 

 stricted fund to be known as the "T.F.H. fund for the increase and 

 diffusion of knowledge concerning fishes suitable for home aquaria." 

 T.F.H. will donate to the Smithsonian Institution reprinted books to 

 be sold by the Institution at not less than cost. The money derived 




400 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



from such sales will be earmarked for research, collection or purchase 

 of fish specimens, explorations, and publication of scientific reports 

 related to aquarium fishes. The second reprint under this agreement 

 was published March 29, 1965; it is The Fresh-Water Fishes of Siam, or 

 Thailand, by Hugh M. Smith, Bulletin 188 of the U.S. National 

 Museum, originally issued in 1945. 



STAFF CHANGES 



Three new editors were added to the staff of the division during the 

 past year: Harriet T. Douty on July 13, 1964; Ernest E. Biebighauser 

 on August 2, 1964; and Mrs. Joan B. Horn on September 8, 1964. 



On July 20, 1964, George J. Berklacy was appointed press officer, 

 and on January 17, 1965, Grimilda Pontes joined the staff as assistant 

 in the design department. 



Mrs. Dorothy M. Watson was. appointed clerk-stenographer on 

 March 31, 1965, following the resignation of Sue D. Wallace on 

 January 29, 1965. 




Report of the Executive Committee of the 



Board of Regents of the Smithsonian 



Institution 



For the Year Ended June 30, 1965 





Report of the Executive Committee of the Board of 

 Regents of the Smithsonian Institution 



For the Year Ended June 30, 1965 



To the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution: 



Your executive committee respectfully submits the following report 

 in relation to the funds of the Smithsonian Institution, together with a 

 statement of the appropriations by Congress for the Government bu- 

 reaus in the administrative charge of the Institution. 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



Parent Fund 



The original bequest of James Smithson was £104,960 8s 6d 

 ($508,318.46). Refunds of money expended in prosecution of the 

 claim, freight, insurance, and other incidental expenses, together 

 with payment into the fund of the sum of £5,015, which had been 

 withheld during the lifetime of Madame de la Batut, brought the 

 fund to the amount of $550,000. 



The gift of James Smithson was "lent to the United States Treasury, 

 at 6 per centum per annum interest" (20 U.S.G. 54) and by the Act 

 of March 12, 1894 (20 U.S.C. 55) the Secretary of the Treasury was 

 "authorized to receive into the Treasury, on the same terms as the 

 original bequest of James Smithson, such sums as the Regents may, 

 from time to time see fit to deposit, not exceeding, with the original 

 bequest the sum of $1,000,000." 



The maximum of $1,000,000 which the Smithsonian Institution 

 was authorized to deposit in the Treasury of the United States was 

 reached on January 11, 1917, by the deposit of $2,000. 



Under the above authority the amounts shown below are deposited 



403 




404 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



in the United States Treasury and draw 6 percent interest: 



Unrestricted 

 Donor funds Income 1965 



James Smithson $727, 640 $43, 658. 40 



Avery 14, 000 840. 00 



Habel 500 30.00 



Hamilton 2,500 150.00 



Hodgkins (General) 116,000 6,960.00 



Poore 26, 670 1, 600. 20 



Rhees 590 35.40 



Sanford 1,100 66.00 



?, 000 $53, 340. 00 

 Restricted 

 funds 



Hodgkins (Specific) $100, 000 6, 000. 00 



Reid 11,000 660.00 



111,000 6,660.00 



,000,000 $60,000.00 



In addition to the $1,000,000 deposited in the Treasury of the United 

 States there has been accumulated from income and bequests the 

 sum of $7,314,088.20 which has been invested. Of this sum, 

 $6,232,813.25 is carried on the books of the Institution as the Con- 

 solidated Fund, a policy approved by the Regents at their meeting 

 on December 14, 1916. The balance is made up of several small 

 funds. 




report of the executive committee 405 

 Consolidated Fund 



[Income for the unrestricted use of the Institution] 



Fund Investment 1965 Income 1965 



Abbott, W. L., Special $24,420.96 $1,197.37 



* Avery, Robert S., and Lydia 64,746.08 3,174.52 



Forrest, Robert Lee 1,771,443.93 86,855.18 



Gifts, royalties, gain on sale of securities .... 452, 590. 06 22, 1 90. 56 



Hachenberg, George P., and Caroline .... 6, 592. 34 323. 24 



♦Hamilton, James 661.65 32.44 



Hart, Gustavus E 798. 37 39. 12 



Henry, Caroline 1,982.44 97.21 



Henry, Joseph and Harriet A 80, 353. 01 3, 939. 70 



Higbee, Harry, Memorial Fund 19,211.07 941.93 



*Hodgkins, Thomas G. (General) 49, 654. 39 2, 434. 55 



Morrow, Dwight W 126,754.98 6,214.84 



Olmsted, Helen A 1,314.17 64.43 



*Poore, Lucy T. and George W 266,780.80 13,080.31 



Porter, Henry Kirke 469,448.21 23,017.17 



*Rhees, William Jones 775. 49 38. 03 



*Sanford, George H 1,459.13 71.56 



*Smithson, James 2,001.15 98.16 



Taggart, Gansen 586. 25 28. 72 



Witherspoon, Thomas A 211,535.38 10,371.60 



Total $3,553,109.86 $174,210.64 



*In addition to funds deposited in the United States Treasury. 




406 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Consolidated Fund 



[Income restricted to specific use] 



Fund Investment 1965 



Abbott, William L., for investigations in biology . $170, 887. 51 



Armstrong, Edwin James, for use of Department of 

 Invertebrate Paleontology when principal 



amounts to $5,000. 00 2, 370. 64 



Arthur, James, for investigations and study of the 



sun and annual lecture on same 65 , 556. 00 



Bacon, Virginia Purdy, for traveling scholarship 



to investigate fauna of countries other than the 



United States 82,123. 80 



Baird, Lucy H., for creating a memorial to Secre- 

 tary Baird 60,098. 06 



Barney, Alice Pike, for collection of paintings and 



pastels and for encouragement of American 



artistic endeavor 47,014. 08 



Barstow, Frederick D., for purchase of animals for 



Zoological Park 1 ,638. 70 



Brown, Roland W., endowment fund — study, care, 



and improvement of the Smithsonian paleo- 



botanical collections 53,393. 25 



Canfield collection, for increase and care of the 



Canfield collection of minerals 62 ,693. 53 



Casey, Thomas L., for maintenance of the Casey 



collection and promotion of researches relating 



to Coleoptera 20 , 546. 1 5 



Chamberlain, Francis Lea, for increase and pro- 

 motion of Isaac Lea Collection of gems and 



mollusks 46,159. 90 



Dykes, Charles, for support in financial research. . 70,572. 10 



Eickemeyer, Florence Brevoort, for preservation 



and exhibition of the photographic collection 



of Rudolph Eickemeyer, Jr 17,816. 94 



Guggenheim, David and Florence, Foundation for 



a commemorative Guggenheim Exhibit, an 



annual Daniel Guggenheim Lecture, and 



annual Guggenheim Fellowships for graduate 



students for research at the National Air 



Museum 25,251.29 



Hanson, Martin Gustav and Caroline Runice, for 



some scientific work of the Institution, prefer- 

 ably in chemistry or medicine 14,572. 05 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 407 



Consolidated Fund — continued 



Fund Investment 7965 Income 7965 



Higbee, Harry, income for general use of the 



Smithsonian Institution after June 11, 1967. . $873. 99 $40. 31 



Hillyer, Virgil, for increase and care of Virgil 



Hillyer collection of lighting objects 10,772. 90 528. 21 



Hitchcock, Albert S., for care of the Hitchcock 



Agrostological Library 2,586.50 126.83 



Hrdlicka, Ales and Marie, to further researches in 

 physical anthropology and publication in 

 connection therewith 95,007. 12 4,440. 48 



Hughes, Bruce, to found Hughes alcove 31,375.95 1 538 39 



Johnson, E. R. Fenimore, research in underwater 



photography 13,168.61 615.47 



Loeb, Morris, for furtherance of knowledge in the 



exact sciences 142,858.52 7,004.39 



Long, Annette and Edith C, for upkeep and preser- 

 vation of Long collection of embroideries, laces, 

 and textiles 890 02 43 63 



Maxwell, Mary E., for care and exhibition of Max- 

 well collection 32,151.01 1,576.37 



Myer, Catherine Walden, for purchase of first-class 

 works of art for use and benefit of the National 

 Collection of Fine Arts 33,109. 66 1 ,623. 37 



Nelson, Edward W., for support of biological 



studies 39,014.44 1,912.88 



Noyes, Frank B., for use in connection with the col- 

 lection of dolls placed in the U.S. National 

 Museum through the interest of Mr. and Mrs. 

 Noyes „ 1,574.79 77.21 



Pell, Cornelia Livingston, for maintenance of 



Alfred Duane Pell collection 12,150. 22 595 72 



Petrocelli, Joseph, for the care of the Petrocelli col- 

 lection of photographic prints and for the en- 

 largement and development of the section of 

 photography of the U.S. National Museum . . 12 , 1 51. 68 595. 81 



Rathbun, Richard, for use of division of U.S. Na- 

 tional Museum containing Crustacea 17,434. 18 854. 77 



*Reid, Addison T., for founding chair in biology, 



in memory of Asher Tunis 29,156. 18 1 ,429. 53 



Roebling Collection, for care, improvement, and 



increase of Roebling collection of minerals ... 197, 828. 71 9 , 699. 58 



Roebling Solar Research 41 , 1 04. 53 2 015.33 



Rollins, Miriam and William, for investigations in 



physics and chemistry 250,459.26 11,986.20 



Smithsonian employees' retirement 37,471.48 1 853.35 



*In addition to funds deposited in the United States Treasury. 




408 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Consolidated Fund — continued 



Fund Investment 1965 Income 1965 



Smithsonian Institution and THF $7 , 543. 98 $216. 66 



Springer, Frank, for care and increase of the 



Springer collection and library 29 ,394. 98 1, 441. 22 



Strong, Julia D., for benefit of the National Collec- 

 tion of Fine Arts 16,389.20 803.56 



Walcott, Charles D. and Mary Vaux, for develop- 

 ment of geological and paleontological studies 



and publishing results of same 787 , 543. 04 38 , 574. 76 



Walcott, Mary Vaux, for publication in botany . . 94,883.87 4,652.19 



Younger, Helen Walcott 127,107.05 6,737.52 



Zerbee, Francis Brinckle, for endowment of 



aquaria 1 ,554. 86 76. 22 



Total $2,806,250.73 $137,370.95 



Freer Gallery of Art Fund 



Early in 1906, by deed of gift, Charles L. Freer, of Detroit, gave to 

 the Institution his collection of Chinese and other Oriental objects of 

 art, as well as paintings, etchings, and other works of art by Whistler, 

 Thayer, Dewing, and other artists. Later he also gave funds for con- 

 struction of a building to house the collection, and finally in his will, 

 probated November 6, 1919, he provided stocks and securities to the 

 estimated value of $1, 958, 591. 42 as an endowment fund for the oper- 

 ation of the Gallery. The fund now amounts to $11, 345, 500. 73. 




report of the executive committee 409 

 Summary of Endowments 



Invested endowment for general purposes $5, 278, 509. 86 



Invested endowment for specific purposes other than Freer en- 

 dowment 3, 035, 578. 34 



Total invested endowment other than Freer 8, 314, 088. 20 



Freer invested endowment for specific purposes 11,345,500.73 



Total invested endowment for all purposes $19,659,588.93 



Classification of Investments 



Deposited in the U.S. Treasury at 6 percent per annum, as 



authorized in the U.S. Revised Statutes, sec. 5591 Si, 000, 000. 00 



Investments other than Freer endowment (cost or market value 

 at date acquired): 



Bonds $2, 869, 467. 95 



Stocks 3,416,006.37 



Real estate and mortgages 951, 406. 00 



Uninvested capital 77,207.88 7,314,088.20 



Total investments other than Freer en- 

 dowment 8,314,088.20 



Investments of Freer endowment (cost or 

 market value at date acquired): 



Bonds $6,270,238.91 



Stocks 4,869,718.34 



Uninvested capital 205,543.48 11,345,500.73 



Total investments $19,659,588.93 



789-127—66 39 




410 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Current funds: 

 General: 

 Cash: 

 United States Treasury 

 current account 

 Inbanks and on hand 



Investments — stocks and 

 bonds (quoted market 

 value $1,418,400.00) 

 (note) 



Travel and other advances 



Total general funds 

 Restricted: 

 Cash: 

 United States Treasury 



current account 

 In banks 



Investments — stocks and 

 bonds (quoted market 

 value $1,695,875.00) 

 (note) 



Total restricted 

 funds 



SMITHSONIAN 

 BALANCE SHEET OF PRIVATE 



Assets 



$583,587.85 

 40, 549. 99 



1,695,540.60 



$1,662,558.56 

 112,511.03 



1,775,069.59 



1,459,651.17 

 20, 262. 26 



3, 254, 983. 02 



2,319,678.44 



Total current funds 



5,574,661.46 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 411 



EXHIBIT A 



INSTITUTION 

 FUNDS, JUNE 30, 1965 



Current funds: 

 General: 

 Unexpended funds — 

 unrestricted 

 (Exhibit B) 



Total general 

 funds 



Fund Balances 



$3, 254, 983. 02 



3, 254, 983. 02 



Restricted (Exhibit C): 

 Unexpended income from 



endowment 

 Funds for special 

 purposes: 

 Gifts 

 Grants 

 Contracts 



Total restricted 

 funds 



Total current 

 funds 



1,351,543.59 



615,908.71 

 613, 902. 20 

 (261, 676. 06) 



2,319,678.44 



5. 574. 661. 46 




412 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Assets — Continued 

 Endowment funds and funds 

 functioning as endowment: 

 Investments: 

 Freer Gallery of Art: 

 Gash $205, 543. 48 



Stocks and bonds 

 (quoted market 

 value 



$17,276,105.00) 

 (note) 11,139,957.25 



11,345,500.73 



Consolidated: 

 Cash $77, 207. 88 



Stocks and bonds 



(quoted market value 



$7,852,739.00) (note) 6, 155, 605. 37 



6,232,813.25 

 Loan to United States 



Treasury 1,000,000.00 



Other stocks and bonds 



(quoted market value 



$177,204.00) (note) 129, 868. 95 



Real estate 951,406.00 8,314,088.20 



Total endowment 

 funds and funds 

 functioning as 

 endowment 19,659,588.93 



$25, 234, 250. 39 



Note: Investments are stated at cost or appraisal value at date of gift. 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 413 



Fund Balances — Continued 



Endowment funds and funds 

 functioning as endowment 

 (Exhibit D): 

 Freer Gallery of Art $11, 345, 500. 73 



Other: 

 Restricted $3, 035, 578. 34 



General 5, 278, 509. 86 



8,314,088.20 



Total endowment 

 funds and 

 funds function- 

 ing as endow- 

 ment 19,659,588.93 



$25, 234, 250. 39 




414 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



eq 



H 



i— i 



pq 



i— i 



E 

 X 

 w 



•fe 



35 



O 00 



s 



o 



so 



CO 



Cs 



s 



s^ *-■ 



S> CM 



of 



v 2 S 5 



oooo 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



415 



O 



H 



I— I 

 PQ 



I— I 



X 

 X 



< 



N M ■<!• * O 

 >0 xf (O \5 N 



N O C\ fl ■* 

 h ^ U1 O r< 



en tj- in . »-i 



pq 




416 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



£ 



O T-l 



o ^H 



CO On T-i 



u 



I 



in 



Q 



H 



t 



o 



«, 



•ft, o 



CO CN 



CO t~^ 

 00 CO 



r-" o" 

 cn in 



■^ t-h o 



O H 00 



T-i r- r-. 



© H CO 



oo m 

 r-~ co 



CO CM 



8 b£ 



S ~ fi 



a o " 



Q 



U X 



■ft "8 



.a o 



I- O ID iu 



■& ■*-> <2 Oh 



« " t X 



t, u u aj 



a .is > a 



SQ0P 



.5 ,2 

 no + - > 



w .y 



03 



B i O 



^ be O 



o o o 



ti 



n 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 417 



EXHIBIT D 



Smithsonian Institution 



PRIVATE FUNDS 



STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN PRINCIPAL OF ENDOWMENT 



FUNDS AND FUNDS FUNCTIONING AS ENDOWMENT 



YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 1965 



Balance at beginning of year $19, 220, 868. 62 



Add: 



Income added to principal as prescribed by donor 12, 010. 79 



Transfer from unexpended income for investment 7, 171. 64 



Net gain on investments 419,537.88 



Balance at end of year 19, 659, 588. 93 



Balance at end of year consisting of: 



Freer Gallery of Art 11, 345, 500. 73 



Other: 

 Restricted 3, 035, 578. 34 



General 5, 278, 509. 86 



$19,659,588.93 




418 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Q 

 « 



U 



c/2 



fa 



fa 



s 

 s 



CO 



i-i O NO rf 

 in oo d n' 



no n ^ n 



s 



^ 

 o 



a 



oo o o o 



no no cn cn 





8? .a 



t 



o 



o £ 



b "0 



Sj S oo v c « a 



fa o 



fa I £ 



o0 



O0c 



fa 



O S 



t< <j 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



419 



W 

 13 



Q 

 X 



u 



£ 



SO O Cv ■■*■ 



T-i m oo o 



os cs r^ so 



in r-~ m t-i 



n m co -t 



**■ to oo" en" 



O CM so CM 



CM o CM 



5*" 



cm in 



n in 



th m 



o en 



cm cs 



m cm 



oi cm n- en o oo 

 oo r- m m cs en 



00 00 Cs so 00 00 



m r~ f- •-> 

 cs <— r»» m 

 ■«*■ *- en m 



oo so *— 



en N N 

 en so 00 



so rf en en 



r^ in so m 



Tf OS CM Tj- 



■* M"" ■* tt 



en t-. r^ so 



Z 



< 



z 



o 



GO 



B 

 H 



S 

 CO 



>-s 



G 

 W 

 Q 

 S 



< 



oo t-< r^- so 



<-> cm r-- t-» en 



c "* ~ ~ ™ 



5 o" K" o o" 





■ ~ oo '* O en 

 >- en O Cs] rf- 



^ oo cs en m 



m r-- 



CS sO 



in en 



■t oo n tn ^ 



so oo r~- m 



m o en o 

 **• **■ r-» CM 

 in en r- cm 



so cs cs m so oo 

 oo r» oo so cm en 



oo ■*• SO SO O0 00 



u — . 'S 



p u ti o, 



s I 3 £ B 



•g < g W 



"3 



s -a c 





O TJ 



"5H 



3 4J 

 0- <& 



M 



be ^ 



•£ a 



O M 

 T3 



E3 



re c 



-t-j .~ re •-* 



S c 

 a re 

 x — 



re 



> c •■•< w o .2 



re re 3 j: js S 



3 




420 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



3 



a 



o 

 O 



CO 



h 

 Z 



CO 



Ph 

 & 



pq 



CO 



Q 

 Z 



En 



H 



Z 

 a 



u 

 



•J 



Q 

 &3 

 ffi 

 U 



CO 



NO r-H CN 

 NO NO •*-)- 



in oo on 



Q 



s 



tt 



JS ■£ > 



"° -3 — 

 cs .y 3 



SI'S 



5 ° 5 



O U tM 



U H » 

 3 



Sh rrj 



8 .2 



» » 8 



u u w 



y & &■ 



B S 



ft, 



1 SI s 



a co o ^2 



a. 



3 



CO 



2 1 

 o .5 



r-5 Ph 



J2 

 &, 

 c3 



S3 So 

 .y u 



a "5 

 a ^ 

 3 12 



» C 



4) ccj 



B § 

 a &< 



S ,y 



"H CO ■!-> O 



1-1 CO CO Ph 



b£ 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 421 



The practice of maintaining savings accounts in several of the Wash- 

 ington banks and trust companies has been continued during the past 

 year, and interest on these deposits amounted to $4,017.04. 



Deposits are made in banks for convenience in collection of checks, 

 and later such funds are withdrawn and deposited in the United States 

 Treasury. Disbursement of funds is made by check signed by the Secre- 

 tary of the Institution and drawn on the United States Treasury. 



The Institution gratefully acknowledges gifts and grants from the 

 following : 



Ernest L. Abernathy, a gift to the Satellite General Program. 



American Heritage Publishing Company, a gift for the purchase of historical 



materials for the National Air Museum. 

 American Petroleum Institute, a grant for research entitled "The Crustose 



Corallines of the North Atlantic." 

 American Philosophical Society, a grant to defray expenses for expedition to 



Greece and Turkey. 

 Anonymous donor, a gift for the Department of Botany. 



Anonymous donor, a gift to the Smithsonian Institution Bicentennial Ceremony. 

 Anonymous donor, a gift for the restoration of the Belmont furniture. 

 Appalachian Power Company, a grant for the survey of the areas on the New 



River in Virginia and North Carolina. 

 Archbold Foundation, a grant for the support of research entitled "Biological 



Survey of Dominica Project." 

 Atomic Energy Commission, a grant for research entitled "A Study of the 



Biochemical Effects of Ionizing and Nonionizing Radiation on Plant Metab- 

 olism During Development." 

 Bredin Foundation, a grant for the support of research entitled "Biological 



Survey of dominica Project." 

 Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Campbell, a gift to the Zoo Animal Fund. 

 Joanne Toor Cummings, a gift for the purpose of acquiring ceramics and glass. 

 DeBeers Consolidated Mines, Ltd., a gift to defray travel expenses to South 



Africa. 

 Department of Agriculture, a grant toward the purchase of the J. Douglas Hood 



Collection of thrips. 

 Department of Air Force: 



Grant for the support of research entitled "Study of Atomic and Electronic 

 Collision Processes which occur in the Atmosphere at Auroral Heights." 



Grant for studies directed toward the development of a technique for measur- 

 ing wind speed and direction at heights using ionized paths generated by 

 meteors. 



Grant for the purpose of training personnel in tracking space object #388. 



Grant for the purpose of the observation in tracking space object #388. 



Grant for the purpose of training 8 personnel on the Baker-Nunn. 



Grant to provide optical satellite tracking support for two nights for program 

 162. 



Grant for the support of research entitled "Researches — Molecular Collisions." 




422 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Grant for the support of research entitled "Compilation of a Subject Index 

 and Cross Reference Listing for the 1964 OAR-AFRR." 

 Department of Army: 



Grant for the support of basic research entitled "Potential Vectors and 

 Reservoirs of Disease in Strategic Overseas Area." 



Grant for the support of research entitled "Mammals and Their Ectoparasites 

 from Iran." 



Grant for support of research on the analysis of bird migration in the 

 Pacific Area and the study of the ecology of birds and mammals on one or 

 more Pacific Islands. 



Grant for the support of research entitled "The Mosquitoes of Southeast 

 Asia." 

 Department of Interior: 



Grant for the support of research entitled "Bird Guide." 



Grant for the support of research entitled "Tropical Fishes." 



Grant for the purpose for the preparation of camera-ready copy of research 

 data suitable for photocopying and printing as a current Water Resources 

 Research Catalog. 

 Department of Navy, a grant for the support of the Careers in Oceanography 



Fund. 

 James M. Doubleday, a gift to the Historic Dresses Fund. 

 Carl Dry, a gift for support of Smithsonian Institution's participation in an 



around the world cruise by Thomas Kurth and party. 

 Ford Motor Co., a gift in support of the model foundry for the Iron and Steel 



Hall. 

 General Motors Corporation, a gift to defray expenses in connection with 



International Council of Museums Committee for Museums of Science and 



Technology. 

 Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, a gift for the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Fund. 

 R. M. Griffin, a gift to the Zoo Animal Fund. 

 E. P. Henderson, a gift for the support of research entitled "Meteorite and 



Tektite Research Fund." 

 Historical Society of Montana, a contribution for the support of the Smithsonian 



Institution. 

 Ethel R. Holmes, a gift for the Milton A. Holmes Memorial Fund 



"Numismatics." 

 Ethel R. Holmes, a gift for the Milton A. Holmes Memorial Fund "Philately." 

 International Association of Geodesy, a gift for the support of operation of 



Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory's Central Bureau of Geodesy. 

 International Astronomical Union, a gift for the support of the Central Bureau 



for Astronomical Telegrams. 

 Felix and Helen Juda Foundation, a gift to the Freer Gallery of Art for the 



purchase of collections. 

 Joseph H. Kler, a gift for the Delaware Log House Exhibit. 

 H. P. Kraus, a gift to the Freer Gallery of Art Library Fund. 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 423 



Edwin A. Link, a gift for the support of the Oceanography Program of the 



Smithsonian Institution. 

 Link Foundation: 

 Grant for the support of the Second Annual Edwin A. Link Lecture. 

 Grant for the preparation of a leaflet about the Oceanographic Sorting 

 Center. 

 Eugene and Agnes Meyer Foundation, a gift for the James Smithson Bicen- 

 tennial Celebration. 

 J. Jefferson Miller II, gift for the Gardner-Miller Ceramics and Glass Fund. 

 Kathryn and Gilbert Miller Fund, Incorporated, gift for the support of the 



National Portrait Gallery. 

 Jacques Minkus, gift for the purchase of Eleanor Roosevelt's eyeglasses and 



chain. 

 Ambrose Monell Foundation, gift for the James Smithson Bicentennial 



Celebration. 

 National Aeronautics and Space Administration: 

 Grant for the procurement of photoreduction equipment for Satellite Track- 

 ing Program. 

 Grant for the support of research entitled "Optical Satellite Tracking 



Program." 

 Grant for the support of research entitled "Textures of Meteorites." 

 Grant for research of the systematic recovery of meteorites and the photog- 

 raphy of meteorites in flight. 

 Grant for the support of basic scientific research entitled "Physical and 



Chemical Investigations of Tektites and Related Glassy Materials." 

 Grant for research studies in the recovery and analysis of space fragments. 

 Grant for the scientific and engineering study for instrumenting an orbiting 



telescope. 

 Grant for research entitled "Computation of Data Reduction of S-16 High 

 Energy Gamma-Ray Experiment." 

 National Geographic Society: 

 Grant for support of research entitled "Investigation of the Crustose Coralline 



of North America." 

 Grant for support of an aerial survey of Stonehenge and Callanish. 

 Grant for support of meteorite-tektite studies in Australia. 

 National Lead Company, gift for the design and furnishing of an exhibit on 



drilling mud. 

 National Science Foundation: 

 Additional grants for the support of research projects entitled as follows: 

 "Early Tertiary Mammals of North America." 

 "Earth Albedo Observations." 

 "Revisionary Study of Blattoidea." 

 "Rare Gases in Meteorites." 



"Morphology and Paleoecology of Permian Branchiopods of the Glass 

 Mountain, Texas." 




424 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



"South Asian Microlepidoptera, particularly the Philippine Series." 



"Photoresponse and Optical Properties of Phycomyces Sporangiophores." 



"Taxonomy of Bamboos." 



"Lower Cretaceous Ostracoda of Israel." 



"Marine Mollusks of Polynesia." 



"Tertiary Echinoids of the Eastern United States and the Caribbean." 



"Zoogeography of Southern Ocean Sclearactinian Coral Faunas." 



"The American Commensal Crabs of the Family Pinnotheridae." 



"Indo-Australian Vespidae sens. lat. and Specidae." 



"Support of publication of an English translation of Flora of Japan, by 



Jisaburo Ohwi." 

 "Revision of Genera of Paleozoic Bryozoa." 

 "Monographic Studies of the Tingidae of the World." 

 "Study of Type Specimens of Ferns in European Herbaria." 

 "Polychaetous Annelids of New England." 

 "The Phanerogams of Colombia." 

 "Monograph of Parmelia Subgenus Xanthoparmelia." 

 "Revision of Scarab Beetles of the Genus Ataenius." 

 "Systemic Studies of the Archidaceae, Subtribe Epidendrinae." 

 "A Monograph of the Stomatopod Crustaceans of the Western Atlantic." 

 "Recording of Data for Specimens Collected During the U.S. Antarctic 



Program." 

 "Distribution of North America Calanoid and Harpacticoid Copepoda." 

 "Magalithic Structures of Panope." 

 "Collection of Meteorites and Tektites in Australia." 

 "Installation of powerline to Barro Colorado from Mainland." 

 "Upper Cretaceous Inoceraminae in North America and Western Europe." 

 "Environment of Permo-Triassic Reptiles of the Order Therapsida in 



South Africa." 

 "Taxonomic and Biological Studies of Neotropical Water Beetles." 

 "Evolution and Distribution of Parmelia in Eastern Asia and Pacific." 

 "Sorting of U.S. Antarctic Research Program Biological Collections." 

 "Taxonomic Studies of the Family Stenomidae in Neotropical Region." 

 "Pre-Industrial System of Water Management in Arid Region." 

 "Effects of Displacement." 

 "Revisionary Studies in the Chilopoda." 

 "Photographic Investigations of Comets." 

 "Purchase of the Hood Collection of Thrips." 

 "Archeological Survey of Southwestern Kansas." 



"Taxonomic and Biological Studies on Central American Caddisflies." 

 "Undergraduate Research Participation Program." 

 "Identification Guide to Antarctic Birds." 

 "Ostracoda of the Indian Ocean." 



"Sorting of Collections from the U.S. Antarctic Research Program." 

 "Sorting of Collections from the International Indian Ocean Expedition." 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 425 



"Systematic of the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic Gammaridean 



Amphipods." 

 "Eltanin Cruise Participations." 

 "Stellar Atmospheres." 



"Comparative Study of Molluscan Faunas of Tertiary Stages." 

 "The Mammals of Panama." 

 "Systematics of Stomiatoid Fishes." 

 "Cooperative Systematics Studies in Antarctic Biology." 

 Neinken Foundation, a gift for defraying the cost to Europe in order to investi- 

 gate collections. 

 H. F. O'Brien, grant for work in marine archeology to be known as the O'Brien 



Marine Archeology Fund. 

 Office of Naval Research: 

 Grant for the purpose of conducting a conference on "The Formation of 



Spectrum Lines." 

 Grant to perform aeronautical research studies. 



Grant to provide expert consultants to advise the Navy Advisory Committee. 

 Grant for the purpose of conducting systematic zoological research on the 



marine fauna of Tropical Pacific Area. 

 Grant to perform psychological research studies. 

 Grant for the support of research entitled "Information of Shark Distribution, 



and Distribution of Shark Attack all over the World." 

 Grant for studies concerning the development of a proposal for an institute for 



Laboratory of human performance standards. 

 Grant for research entitled "Behavior of Animals Associated with Coral 



Reefs." 

 Grant for research entitled "Microlepidoptera of the Island of Rapa." 

 Grant for support of research entitled "Studies of the Ecology, Distribution 

 and Classification of South American Birds." 

 Research Corporation, grant for its convocation of prominent scholars and 



scientists in recognition of the Smithson Bicentennial Celebration. 

 Bernard T. Rocca, Sr., gift to purchase a very fine gold nugget from Colombia. 

 Bernard T. Rocca, Sr., gift to the Rocca Fund. 

 Rockefeller Foundation, grant for support of research entitled "Relationship 



of Birds to Arthropod Transmitted Virus Disease." 

 S and H Foundation, grant to help defray the expense of the Bicentennial 



Celebration of the birth of James Smithson. 

 Frank R. Schwengel, grant to the Jeanne Schwengel Memorial Fund. 

 Montgomery Scott Company, grant to the Burleigh Rock Drill Fund. 

 Shell Oil Foundation, grant for the purchase of photographs of World War I. 

 Sidney Printing and Publishing Company, grant for the purchase of U.S. coins. 

 Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, grant for support of the observance of the 200th 



anniversary of the birth of the founder of the Smithsonian Institution. 

 E. R. Squibb and Sons, grant for the purpose of enriching the Squibb Ancient 



Pharmacy. 

 St. Petersburg Shell Company, grant for the St. Petersburg Shell Company 

 Fund. 



789-427—66 40 




426 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



For the purpose of the Smithson Bicentennial Ceremony: 



Anonymous Alexander C. Liggett 



Laura D. Barney Henry P. Mcllhenny 



John Nicholas Brown Paul Mellon 



Mrs. Henry Cook Mrs. Paul Moore 



David and Margey Finley Mrs. William Morden 



Crawford H. Greenwald Marjorie Merriweather Post 



Wilmarth Lewis Thomas Watson 



United States Steel Company, grant to defray the cost of a model of an in- 

 tegrated steel plant. 



University of Michigan, a contribution to the Freer Gallery of Art for the ARS 

 ORIENTALIS Fund. 



I. E. Wallen, a grant to provide for underseas vehicle experience by the 

 Smithsonian Institution staff. 



C. Malcolm Watkins, a grant for the purchase of New York State pottery. 



Ellen Bayard Weedon Foundation, gift to the Freer Gallery of Art for the 

 Library Fund. 



Wenner-Gren Foundation, a grant to aid steady and analysis of skeletal ma- 

 terial from Near Eastern sites. 



Wenner-Gren Foundation, a grant to aid attendance of non-LJ.S. anthropolo- 

 gists at the Bicentennial celebration of the birth of James Smithson. 



Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, grant to permit the participation in 

 the International Indian Ocean Expedition. 



Charles M. Wormser, grant to provide acquisitions for the Division of 

 Numismatics. 



The following appropriations were made by Congress for the Govern- 

 ment bureaus under the administrative charge of the Smithsonian 

 Institution for the fiscal year 1965: 



Salaries and Expenses $15,540,000.00 



National Zoological Park $1,738,565.00 



The appropriation made to the National Gallery of Art (which is a 



bureau of the Smithsonian Institution) was $2,176,000.00 



Iii addition, funds were transferred from other Government agencies 

 for expenditure under the direction of the Smithsonian Institution as 

 follows : 



Working funds, transferred from the National Park Service, 

 Interior Department, for archeological investigations in river 

 basins throughout the United States $237, 000. 00 



The Institution also administers a trust fund for partial support of the 

 Canal Zone Biological Area, located on Barro Colorado Island in the 

 Canal Zone. 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 427 



AUDIT 



The report of the audit of the Smithsonian Private Funds follows: 



THE BOARD OF REGENTS, 

 SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20560 



We have examined the balance sheet of private funds of Smithsonian Insti- 

 tution as of June 30, 1965, and the related statement of current general private 

 fund receipts and disbursements and several statements of changes in funds 

 for the year then ended. Our examination was made in accordance with 

 generally accepted auditing standards, and accordingly included such tests of 

 the accounting records and such other auditing procedures as we considered 

 necessary in the circumstances. 



Except for certain real estate acquired by gift or purchased from proceeds 

 of gifts which are valued at cost or appraised value at date of gift, land, build- 

 ings, furniture, equipment, works of art, living and other specimens and certain 

 sundry property are not included in the accounts of the Institution; likewise, 

 the accompanying statements do not include the National Gallery of Art, the 

 John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and other departments, 

 bureaus and operations administered by the Institution under Federal Appro- 

 priations. The accounts of the Institution are maintained on the basis of cash 

 receipts and disbursements, with the result that the accompanying statements 

 do not reflect income earned but not collected or expenses incurred but not paid. 



In our opinion, subject to the matters referred to in the preceding paragraph, 

 the accompanying statement of private funds presents fairly the assets and funds 

 principal of Smithsonian Institution at June 30, 1965; further, the accompany- 

 ing statement of current general private fund receipts and disbursements and 

 several statements of changes in funds, which have been prepared on a basis 

 consistent with that of the preceding year, present fairly the cash transactions 

 of the private funds for the year then ended. 



Washington, D.C. PEAT, MARWICK, MITCHELL & CO. 



October 8, 1965 



Respectfully submitted: 



Robert V. Fleming 

 Caryl P. Haskins 

 Clinton P. Anderson 



Executive Committee. 





STAFF OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



June 30, 1965 



Office of the Secretary 

 Special Assistants 



Executive Assistant 



Treasurer 



General Counsel 



Editorial and Publications 



Education and Training 



Library 



Library of Congress Liaison 



Fine Arts Special Project 



Special Projects 



Smithsonian Museum 



Service 

 Personnel 



Buildings Management 

 Supply Division 

 Photographic Services Division 



Theodore W. Taylor, Assistant to the Secre- 

 tary 



Philip C. Ritterbush, scientific matters 



William W. Warner, international activities 



John Whitelaw, research staff 



Robert W. Mason 



Otis O. Martin 



Peter G. Powers 



Paul H. Oehser, Chief 



Jerold Roschwalb, Assistant Director 



Mrs. Mary A. Huffer, Acting Librarian 



Ruth E. Blanchard 



Thomas M. Beggs 



Robert N. Cunningham, Director, Smithson 

 Bicentennial Celebration 



G. Carroll Lindsay, Curator 



J. A. Kennedy, Director 

 Andrew F. Michaels, Jr., Director 

 A. W. Wilding, Chief 

 O. H. Greeson, Chief 



Honorary Smithsonian Fellows, Associates, Collaborators, Custodians 

 of Collections, and Honorary Curators 



Anthropology 



Vertebrate ^oology 



John M. Campbell (Archeology), Sister Inez 

 Hilger (Ethnology), C. G. Holland (Arche- 

 ology), Neil M. Judd (Archeology), Olga 

 Linares de Sapir (Archeology), Betty J. 

 Meggers (Archeology), Frank H. H. 

 Roberts, Jr. (Archeology), Matthew W. 

 Stirling (Archeology), Walter W. Taylor, 

 Jr. (Anthropology), William J. Tobin 

 (Physical Anthropology), Nathalie F. S. 

 Woodbury (Archeology) 



John W. Aldrich (Birds), Oliver L. Austin 

 (Birds), Leonard Carmichael (Psychology 

 and Animal Behavior), Herbert G. Deig- 

 nan (Birds), Robert W. Ficken (Birds), 

 Herbert Friedmann (Birds), Laurence 

 Irving (Birds), E. V. Komarek (Mammals), 

 Richard H. Manville (Mammals), 

 Michael Palmieri (Birds), Dioscoro S. 



429 




430 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Invertebrate ^oology 



Entomology 



Botany 



Paleobiology 



Mineral Sciences 



Science and Technology 

 Arts and Manufactures 

 Civil History 



Rabor (Birds), Lester L. Short (Birds), 

 Robert Traub (Mammals), Alexander 

 Wetmore (Birds) 



Willard W. Becklund (Helminthology) , 

 J. Bruce Bredin (Biology), Ailsa M. Clark 

 (Marine Invertebrates), Allen McIntosh 

 (Mollusks), J. Percy Moore 1 (Marine In- 

 vertebrates), Waldo L. Schmitt (Marine 

 Invertebrates), Benjamin Schwartz (Hel- 

 minthology), Mrs. Mildred Stratton 

 Wilson (Copepod Crustacea) 



Doris H. Blake (Coleoptera), Melbourne 

 A. Carriker, Jr. 2 (Mallophaga), Carl J. 

 Drake 3 (Hemiptera), K. C. Emerson (Mal- 

 lophaga), Frank M. Hull (Diptera), 

 William L. Jellison (Siphonaptera, Ano- 

 plura), Carl F. W. Muesebeck (Hy- 

 menoptera), Thomas E. Snyder (Isoptera) 



Chester R. Benjamin (Fungi), Jose Cuatre- 

 casas (Flora of Tropical South America), 

 Francis R. Fosberg (Pacific Floras), Emery 

 C. Leonard (Acanthaceae), Elbert L. 

 Little, Jr. (Dendrology), Floyd A. 

 McClure (Bamboos), Kittie F. Parker 

 (Compositae), John A. Stevenson (Fungi), 

 Egbert H. Walker (Myrsinaceae, Eastern 

 Asian Floras), William N. Watkins (Woods) 



C. Wythe Cooke (Invertebrate Paleontology), 

 J. Thomas Dutro (Invertebrate Paleon- 

 tology), Remington Kellogg (Vertebrate 

 Paleontology), Axel A. Olsson (Inverte- 

 brate Paleontology), Franco Rasetti (In- 

 vertebrate Paleontology), Wendell P. 

 Woodring (Invertebrate Paleontology) 



Gunnar Kullerud (Meteorites), Waldemar 

 T. Schaller (Mineralogy) 



Derek J. de Solla Price 



Hans Syz (Ceramics) 



Mrs. Arthur M. Greenwood (Cultural 

 History), Elmer C. Herber (History), 

 Ivor Noel Hume (Cultural History), Fred 

 W. McKay (Numismatics), Mrs. Emery 

 May Norweb (Numismatics), R. Henry 

 Norweb (Numismatics), Mrs. Joan Pear- 

 son Watkins (Cultural History) 



l Deceased March 1, 1965. J Deceased July 27, 1965. 3 Deceased October 2, 1965. 




STAFF OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



431 



Armed Forces History 



Exhibits 



Smithsonian Astrophysical 



Observatory 

 Freer Gallery of Art 



National Air Museum 



National Zoological Park 

 Canal %pne Biological Area 



William Rea Furlong, Frederic C. Lane, 



Byron McCandless 

 W. L. Brown (Taxidermy) 

 Charles G. Abbot 



Oleg Grabar, Grace Dunham Guest 4 , Max 

 Loehr, Katherine N. Rhoades 



Frederick C. Crawford, Alfred V. Ver- 

 ville 



E. P. Walker 



C. C. SOPER 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Director 

 Registrar 



Exhibits Labels Editor 

 Office of Exhibits 

 Natural History Laboratory 



History and Technology 

 Laboratory 



Conservation Research Laboratory 



Frank A. Taylor 

 Helena M. Weiss 

 George Weiner 

 John E. Anglim, Chief 

 A. Gilbert Wright, Assistant Chief 

 Julius Tretick, Production Supervisor 

 Benjamin W. Lawless, Chief 

 William M. Clark, Jr., Production Super- 

 visor 

 Charles H. Olin, Chief 

 Mrs. Jacqueline S. Olin, Chemist 



MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Director 



Assistant Director for 

 Systematics 



Assistant Director for Oceanog- 

 raphy 

 Smithsonian Oceanographic 

 Sorting Center 



Administrative Officer 



Smithsonian Office of 

 Anthropology 



Cultural Anthropology 



T. Dale Stewart 

 Richard S. Cowan 



I. Eugene Wallen 



H. Adair Fehlmann, Supervisory Museum 



Specialist 

 Mrs. Mabel A. Byrd 

 Richard B. Woodbury, Acting Head 

 Mrs. M. Blaker, Archivist 

 Henry B. Collins, Senior Scientist 

 Waldo R. Wedel, Senior Scientist 

 Joseph Andrews, Exhibit Specialist 

 Saul H. Riesenberg, Curator in Charge 

 Clifford Evans, Jr., Associate Curator 

 William H. Crocker, Associate Curator 

 Kent V. Flannery, Associate Curator 



4 Deceased July 7, 1964. 




432 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Physical Anthropology 



River Basin Surveys 

 Vertebrate ^oology 



Fishes 



Reptiles and Amphibians 

 Birds 



Mammals 



Invertebrate ^oology 

 Marine Invertebrates 



Mollusks 



Entomology 

 Neuropteroids 



Gordon D. Gibson, Associate Curator 

 Eugene I. Knez, Associate Curator 

 Robert M. Laughlin, Associate Curator 

 William C. Sturtevant, Associate Curator 

 Gus W. Van Beek, Associate Curator 

 J. Lawrence Angel, Curator in Charge 

 Lucile E. Hoyme, Associate Curator 

 Robert L. Stephenson, Acting Director 

 Philip S. Humphrey, Chairman 

 Leonard P. Schultz, Senior Scientist 

 Watson M. Perrygo, Chief of Specimen Prep- 

 aration Laboratory 

 Ernest A. Lachner, Curator in Charge 

 Victor G. Springer, Associate Curator 

 William R. Taylor, Associate Curator 

 Stanley H. Weitzman, Associate Curator 

 Robert H. Gibbs, Jr., Associate Curator 

 Leonard P. Schultz, Senior Scientist 

 Doris M. Cochran, Curator in Charge 

 James A. Peters, Associate Curator 

 George E. Watson, Acting Curator in Charge 

 Richard L. Zusi, Associate Curator 

 Paul Slud, Associate Curator 

 Charles O. Handley, Jr., Curator in Charge 

 Henry W. Setzer, Associate Curator 

 David H. Johnson, Research Curator 

 Donald F. Squires, Chairman 

 Raymond B. Manning, Acting Curator in 



Charge 

 Thomas E. Bowman, Associate Curator 

 Charles E. Cutress, Jr., Associate Curator 

 Marian H. Pettibone, Associate Curator 

 David L. Pawson, Associate Curator 

 Meredith L. Jones, Associate Curator 

 Louis S. Kornicker, Associate Curator 

 J. Laurens Barnard, Associate Curator 

 W. Duane Hope, Associate Curator 

 Roger F. Cressey, Jr., Associate Curator 

 Fenner A. Chace, Jr., Senior Scientist 

 Horton H. Hobbs, Jr., Senior Scientist 

 Joseph Rosewater, Acting Curator in Charge 

 Joseph P. E. Morrison, Associate Curator 

 Harald A. Rehder, Research Curator 

 J. F. Gates Clarke, Chairman 

 Oliver S. Flint, Jr., Associate Curator in 

 Charge 




STAFF OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



433 



Lepidoptera 



Coleoptera 



Hemiptera 



Myriapoda and Arachnida 

 Botany 

 Phanerogams 



Ferns 



Grasses 



Cryptogams 



Plant Anatomy 

 Fungi 



Paleobiology 

 Invertebrate Paleontology 



Vertebrate Paleontology 



Paleobotany 

 Sedimentology 



Donald R. Davis, Curator in Charge 

 W. Donald Duckworth, Associate Curator 

 William D. Field, Associate Curator 

 Oscar L. Cartwright, Curator in Charge 

 Paul J. Spangler, Associate Curator 

 Richard C. Froeschner, Associate Curator 



in Charge 

 Ralph E. Crabill, Jr., Curator in Charge 

 William L. Stern, Chairman 

 Lyman B. Smith, Curator in Charge 

 Wallace R. Ernst, Associate Curator 

 Dan H. Nicolson, Associate Curator 

 Stanwyn G. Shetler, Associate Curator 

 Velva E. Rudd, Associate Curator 

 John J. Wurdack, Associate Curator 

 Conrad V. Morton, Curator in Charge 

 David B. Lellinger, Associate Curator 

 Thomas R. Soderstrom, Curator in Charge 

 Jason R. Swallen, Research Scientist 

 Mason E. Hale, Jr., Curator in Charge 

 Paul S. Conger, Associate Curator 

 Harold E. Robinson, Associate Curator 

 E. Yale Dawson, Curator 

 William L. Stern, Acting Curator in Charge 

 Richard H. Eyde, Associate Curator 

 Chester R. Benjamin, Honorary Research 



Associate in Charge 

 John A. Stevenson, Honorary Research Asso- 

 ciate 

 G. Arthur Cooper, Chairman 

 Richard S. Boardman, Curator in Charge 

 Porter M. Kier, Associate Curator 

 Richard Cifelli, Associate Curator 

 Erle G. Kauffman, Associate Curator 

 Martin A. Buz as, Associate Curator 

 Richard H. Benson, Associate Curator 

 Kenneth M. Towe, Associate Curator 

 C. Lewis Gazin, Curator in Charge 

 David H. Dunkle, Associate Curator 

 Nicholas Hotton III, Associate Curator 

 Clayton E. Ray, Associate Curator 

 Francis M. Hueber, Curator in Charge 

 Walter H. Adey, Associate Curator 

 Jack W. Pierce, Curator in Charge 




434 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Mineral Sciences 

 Meteorites 



Mineralogy 

 Petrology 



George S. Switzer, Chairman 



Kurt Fredriksson, Curator in Charge 



Edward P. Henderson, Curator 



Roy S. Clarke, Jr., Chemist 



Paul E. Desautels, Associate Curator in 



Charge 

 William Melson, Associate Curator in Charge 



MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY 



Director 



Assistant Director 

 Liaison Editor 

 Administrative Officers 

 Science and Technology 



Physical Sciences 



Mechanical and Civil 

 Engineering 



Electricity 

 Transportation 



Medical Sciences 



Arts and Manufactures 

 Manufactures and Heavy 



Industries 

 Agriculture and Forest 



Products 

 Textiles 



Ceramics and Glass 



John C. Ewers 



Silvio A. Bedini 



Roger Pineau 



William E. Boyle, Virginia Beets 



Robert P. Multhauf, Chairman; in Charge 

 of Sections of Chemistry and Meteorology 



Deborah J. Mills, Assistant Curator 



Walter F. Cannon, Curator in Charge; 

 Sections of Astronomy and Physics 



Uta C. Merzbach, Associate Curator, Sec- 

 tions of Mathematics and Antique Instru- 

 ments 



Robert M. Vogel, Associate Curator in 

 Charge; Sections of Heavy Machinery, Tools, 

 and Civil Engineering 



Edwin A. Battison, Associate Curator, Sec- 

 tions of Light Machinery and Horology 



Bernard S. Finn, Curator 



Howard I. Chapelle, Curator in Charge; 

 Section of Marine Transportation 



Kenneth M. Perry, Associate Curator 



John H. White, Jr., Associate Curator, Sec- 

 tion of Land Transportation 



Sami K. Hamarneh, Curator in Charge; 

 Sections of Medical and Dental History and 

 Pharmaceutical History and Health 



Philip W. Bishop, Chairman 



Philip W. Bishop, Acting Curator 



John N. Hoffman, Associate Curator 



John T. Schlebecker, Curator 



Mrs. Grace Rogers Cooper, Curator 

 Rita J. Adrosko, Associate Curator 

 Paul V. Gardner, Curator 

 J. Jefferson Miller II, Associate Curator 




STAFF OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



435 



Graphic Arts 

 Civil History 



Political History 



Cultural History 



Philately and Postal History 

 Numismatics 



Armed Forces History 

 Military History 



Naval History 



Jacob Kainen, Curator 



Eugene Ostroff, Associate Curator, Section 



of Photography 

 Richard H. Howland, Chairman 

 Peter C. Welsh, Curator 

 Mrs. Doris E. Borthwick, Assistant Curator 

 Anne Castrodale, Assistant Curator 

 Wilcomb E. Washburn, Curator 

 Mrs. Margaret B. Klapthor, Associate 



Curator 

 Keith E. Melder, Associate Curator 

 Mrs. Anne W. Murray, Associate Curator 

 Herbert R. Collins, Assistant Curator 

 Mrs. Claudia B. Kidwell, Assistant Curator 

 C. Malcolm Watkins, Curator 

 Howard M. Brown, Associate Curator 

 Mrs. Cynthia A. Hoover, Associate Curator 

 Rodris C. Roth, Associate Curator 

 Carl H. Scheele, Associate Curator in Charge 

 Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli, Curator 

 Mrs. Elvira Clain-Stefanelli, Associate 



Curator 

 Mendel L. Peterson, Chairman 

 Edgar M. Howell, Curator 

 Craddock R. Goins, Jr., Associate Curator 

 Philip K. Lundeberg, Curator 

 Melvin H. Jackson, Associate Curator 



INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE SERVICE 

 Chief J. A. Collins 



NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 



Director 

 Office of the Director 



T. H. Reed 



Travis E. Fauntleroy, Assistant to the Direc- 

 tor 

 Marian McCrane, Zoologist 

 Clinton W. Gray, Veterinarian 



SMITHSONIAN ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Director 

 Office of the Director 



Publications and Information 



Fred L. Whipple 



Carlton W. Tillinghast, Assistant Director 



(Administration) 

 Charles A. Lundquist, Assistant Director 



(Science) 

 Leon Campbell, Jr., Executive Director 

 R. N. Watts, J. Cornell 




436 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



Astronomers 



Chemist 



Engineers 



Geodesists 



Geologists 



Geophysicists 



Mathematicians 



Physical Metallurgist 

 Physicists 



G. Colombo, L. Goldberg, Y. Hagihara, 

 G. S. Hawkins, Y. Kozai, R. Martin, 

 J. Slowey, L. Solomon, F. W. Wright 



D. A. Pitman 



T. E. Hoffman, G. G. Lehr, Y. Nozawa 



L. Aardoom, W. Kohlein, J. Rolff, W. E. 



Strange, G. Veis 

 O. B. Marvin, J. Wood 



E. M. Gaposchkin, C. Y. Wang 



R. W. Briggs, M. P. Friedman, D. A. Laut- 

 man 



M. F. Comerford 



E. Avrett, P. L. Bhatnagar, N. P. Carle- 

 ton, A. F. Cook, R. J. Davis, J. De Felice, 

 C. H. Dugan, G. G. Fazio, E. L. Fireman, 

 F. Franklin, O. Gingerich, M. Grossi, 

 R. R. Haefner, H. F. Helmken, P. V. 

 Hodge, W. M. Irvine, L. G. Jaccia, W. 

 Kalkofen, A. R. Lee, D. J. Malaise, 

 R. E. McCrosky, H. Mitler, R. W. 

 Noyes, J. B. Pollack, A. G. Posen, M. 

 Roemer, G. B. Rybicki, C. E. Sagan, R. B. 

 Southworth, S. E. Strom, D. Tilles, 

 S. Tsuruta, F. F. Verniani, C. A. Whitney, 

 J. P. Wright 



RADIATION BIOLOGY LABORATORY 



Director 



Assistant Director 

 Biochemists 



Geochemist 



Plant Physiologists 



Electronic Engineer 

 Instrument Engineering 



Technicians 

 Physicist 



W. H. Klein 

 W. Shropshire, Jr. 

 D. L. Correll 

 M. M. Margulies 



A. Long 



V. B. Elstad, K. Mitrakos ; 



L. Price, A. M. Steiner 

 J. H. Harrison 

 D. G. Talbert. 



B. Goldberg 



NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 



Director 



Assistant to the Director 



Special Consultant 



Curator (Exhibits) 



Curator (Painting and Sculpture) 



David W. Scott 

 Donald R. McClelland 

 Mrs. Adelyn Dohme Breeskin 

 Harry Lowe 

 Richard P. Wunder 




STAFF OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



437 



Curator {Information and 



Lending) 

 Librarian 

 Smithsonian Traveling 



Exhibition Service 

 Smithsonian Art 



Commission 



Members 



Members Emeritus 



Rowland Lyon 



William Walker 



Mrs. Dorothy Van Arsdale, Chief 



Mrs. Nancy Curtis Padnos, Assistant Chief 



Edgar Richardson, Chairman 



Gilmore D. Clarke, Vice Chairman 



S. Dillon Ripley, Secretary 



Gilmore D. Clarke, Page Cross, David E. 

 Finley, Lloyd Goodrich, Walker Han- 

 cock, Bartlett H. Hayes, Jr., Wilmarth 

 S. Lewis, Paul Manship, Henry P. 

 McIlhenny, Paul Mellon, Ogden M. 

 Pleissner, Edgar Richardson, S. Dillon 

 Ripley, Charles H. Sawyer, Stow 

 Wengenroth, Andrew Wyeth 



Leonard Carmichael, Alexander Wetmore 



FREER GALLERY OF ART 



Director 



Assistant Director 



Head Curator {Near Eastern 



Art) 

 Associate Curator {Chinese Art) 

 Head, Technical Laboratory 



John A. Pope 

 Harold P. Stern 

 Richard Ettinghausen 



William Trousdale 

 Rutherford J. Gettens 



Trustees 



President 

 Vice President 

 Secretary- Treasurer 

 Director 

 Administrator 

 General Counsel 

 Chief Curator 

 Assistant Director 



NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 



Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United 

 States, Chairman 



Dean Rusk, Secretary of State 



Henry H. Fowler, Secretary of the Treasury 



S. Dillon Ripley, Secretary of the Smith- 

 sonian Institution 



Paul Mellon, John Hay Whitney, John N. 

 Irwin II, Lessing J. Rosenwald, Franklin 

 D. Murphy 



Paul Mellon 



John Hay Whitney 



Huntington Cairns 



John Walker 



Ernest R. Feidler 



Huntington Cairns 



Perry B. Cott 



J. Carter Brown 




438 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1965 



NATIONAL AIR MUSEUM 



S. Paul Johnston 

 Frederick G. Durant 



Paul E. Garber 



James A. Mahoney 

 Louis C. Casey, Curator in Charge 

 Kenneth E. Newland, Curator in Charge 

 Robert B. Meyer, Curator in Charge 



Director 



Assistant Director 

 (Astronautics) 

 Assistant Director (Education 



and Information) 

 Visual Information Officer 



Flight Craft 



Flight Materiel 



Flight Propulsion 



Preservation and Restoration Walter M. Male, Facilities Manager 





CANAL ZONE BIOLOGICAL AREA 



Director M. H. Moynihan 



Biologists Robert L. Dressler, A. Stanley Rand, 



Neal G. Smith 



JOHN F. KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 



Chairman 

 Officers 



Roger L. Stevens 



Robert O. Anderson, Vice Chairman 



Sol M. Linowitz, Vice Chairman 



Ralph E. Becker, General Counsel 



Daniel W. Bell, Treasurer 



K. LeMoyne Billings, Secretary 



Philip J. Mullin, Assistant Secretary and 



Administrative Officer 

 Herbert D. Lawson, Assistant Treasurer 

 Kenneth Birgfeld, Assistant Treasurer 

 Paul Seltzer, Assistant Treasurer 

 L. Corrin Strong, Chairman Emeritus 



NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 



Director Charles Nagel 



Associate Curator Robert G. Stewart 



Commission Catherine Drinker Bowen, Julian P. Boyd, 



John Nicholas Brown, Lewis Deschler, 

 David E. Finley, Wilmarth Sheldon 

 Lewis, Richard H. Shryock, Col. Frede- 

 rick P. Todd 



Ex Officio Chief Justice of the United States 



Secretary, Smithsonian Institution 

 Director, National Gallery of Art 




STAFF OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



439 



SCIENCE INFORMATION EXCHANGE 



Director 



Deputy Director 

 Associate Directors 



Assistant Directors 



Executive Officer 



Monroe E. Freeman 



David F. Hersey 



Willis R. Foster, Life Sciences 



Frank J. Kreysa, Physical Sciences 



William H. Fitzpatrick, Special Projects 



Harvey Marron, Operations 



Edward H. Kohn 



NATIONAL ARMED FORCES MUSEUM ADVISORY BOARD 



Director 



Assistant Director 

 Museum Specialist 

 Chairman 

 Ex Officio 



Members 



Col. John H. Magruder III 



James S. Hutchins 



Col. Robert M. Calland 



John Nicholas Brown 



Secretary of Defense, Secretary, Smith- 

 sonian Institution 



Chief Justice of the United States, Secre- 

 tary of Army, Secretary of Navy, 

 Secretary of Air Force, David Lloyd 

 Kreeger, Henry Bradford Washburn, Jr., 

 William H. Perkins, Jr., James H. Cassell, 











