
fOSTO^ 



\ 






APR 5 - 1967 



SMITHSONIAN 



YEAR 

 1966 




)9<#(* 




Smithsonian Year 

 1966 



ANNUAL REPORT OF THE 



EAR 

 THE 

 1 VE 



•fT ,NTS 



<5 



f 



I g- % r 



S * ^ * -ft- 



ps 



8 -^ 



2>: 



*1 N 



ON ' " 



£ 5 







Smithsonian Year 

 1966 



ANNUAL REPORT OF THE 

 SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION FOR THE YEAR 

 ENDED JUNE 30, 1966, INCLUDING THE 

 FINANCIAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE 

 COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF REGENTS 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



Washington 1966 



For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office 

 Washington, D.C., 20402 - Price $1.75 




The Smithsonian Institution 



The Smithsonian Institution was created by act of Congress in 1846, 

 in accordance with the terms of the will of James Smithson, of England, 

 who in 1826 bequeathed his property to the United States of America 

 "to found at Washington, under the name of the Smithsonian Institu- 

 tion, an establishment for the increase and diffusion of knowledge 

 among men." In receiving the property and accepting the trust, 

 Congress determined that the Federal Government was without 

 authority to administer the trust directly, and, therefore, constituted 

 an "establishment," whose statutory members are "the President, 

 the Vice President, the Chief Justice, and the heads of the executive 

 departments." 



The Establishment 



Lyndon B. Johnson, President of the United States 



Hubert H. Humphrey, Vice President of the United States 



Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United States 



Dean Rusk, Secretary of State 



Henry H. Fowler, Secretary of the Treasury 



Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of Defense 



Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, Attorney General 



Lawrence F. O'Brien, Postmaster General 



Stewart L. Udall, Secretary of Interior 



Orville L. Freeman, Secretary of Agriculture 



John T. Connor, Secretary of Commerce 



W. Willard Wirtz, Secretary of Labor 



John W. Gardner, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare 



Robert C. Weaver, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 



II 




Board of Regents and Secretary 

 June 30, 1966 



Presiding Officer ex officio 



Chancellor 



Regents of the Institution 



Executive Committee 



Secretary 



Assistant Secretaries 



Lyndon B. Johnson, President of the United 

 States 



Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United 

 States 



Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United 

 States, Chancellor 



Hubert H. Humphrey, Vice President of the 

 United States 



Clinton P. Anderson, Member of the Senate 



J. William Fulbright, Member of the Senate 



Leverett Saltonstall, Member of the Senate 



Frank T. Bow, Member of the House of 

 Representatives 



Michael J. Kirwan, Member of the House of 

 Representatives 



George H. Mahon, Member of the House of 

 Representatives 



John Nicholas Brown, citizen of Rhode Island 



William A. M. Burden, citizen of New York 



Robert V. Fleming, citizen of Washington, 

 D.C. 



Crawford H. Greenewalt, citizen of Dela- 

 ware 



Caryl P. Haskins, citizen of Washington, D.C. 



Jerome C. Hunsaker, citizen of Massachusetts 



Robert V. Fleming, Chairman, Clinton P. 

 Anderson, Caryl P. Haskins 



S. Dillon Ripley 



James Bradley, Assistant Secretary (Admin- 

 istration) 



Sidney R. Galler, Assistant Secretary (Science) 



\ listing of the professional staff of the Smithsonian Institution, its 

 Dureaus, and its offices, appears in Appendix 6. 



in 




Last year, the Annual Report of the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution for the 

 first time appeared under the general title Smithsonian Tear. At that time certain 

 changes were instituted in the procedures pertaining to Smithsonian annual reports: 



1 . Issuance of the Annual Report of the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution 



(now Smithsonian Year) is no longer followed by appearance of a greenbound 

 volume containing a General Appendix of articles in the sciences and the arts. 

 The last of the old series is that for 1964. 



2. For 1965, the objective of the General Appendix was met by a Smithsonian 



yearbook containing the eleven addresses delivered at the scholarly sessions 

 of the Smithson Bicentennial Celebration held in Washington in September 

 1965. Entitled Knowledge Among Men, it was published in 1966 by Simon and 

 Schuster for the Smithsonian Institution. 



3. The United States National Museum Annual Report is no longer issued initially as a 



separate document reporting on the activities of its component Museums 

 of Natural History and of History and Technology. These reports are hence- 

 forth incorporated in Smithsonian Year, together with the reports of the other 

 branches of the Institution. 



4. Reprints of each of these reports are available. To some of them are appended 



tabulated and statistical information which is of primary interest to those 

 concerned with the particular field covered, and which for reasons of space 

 can no longer be carried in this volume. 



SMITHSONIAN PUBLICATION 4697 




Contents 



Page 



The Establishment ii 



The Smithsonian Institution hi 



Statement by the Secretary 1 



Office of the Secretary 19 



Office of International Activities 21 



Office of Education and Training 30 



Office of Public Information 32 



Smithsonian Press 33 



Smithsonian Museum Service 37 



Smithsonian Associates 38 



United States National Museum 43 



Office of the Registrar 45 



Office of Exhibits 47 



Conservation- Analytical Laboratory 52 



Traveling Exhibition Service 53 



Smithsonian Activities — Natural Sciences 57 



Museum of Natural History 63 



Research and Publication 72 



Systematics 72 



Ecology 73 



Oceanography 77 



Anthropology 78 



Vertebrate Zoology 90 



Invertebrate Zoology 95 



Entomology 98 



Botany 102 



Paleobiology 105 



Mineral Sciences 112 



The Collections 115 



Care and Conservation 115 



Gifts and Additions 122 



Exhibits 132 



Staff Publications 134 



National Zoological Park 153 



Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute 163 



Radiation Biology Laboratory . 173 



v 




Page 



Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 181 



Meteors and Comets 182 



Meteorites and Cosmic Dust 184 



Planetary Studies 186 



Theoretical Astrophysica 192 



Radio Astronomy 195 



Optical Astronomy 196 



Historical Astronomy 199 



Central Bureaus 200 



Staff Changes 200 



Staff Papers 201 



Science Information Exchange 215 



Smithsonian Activities — History and Art 219 



Museum of History and Technology 221 



Research and Publication 224 



Science and Technology 224 



Arts and Manufactures 227 



Civil History 231 



Armed Forces History 233 



Growth of the United States 236 



American Studies 237 



The Collections 238 



Care and Conservation 238 



Gifts and Additions 242 



Exhibits 250 



Staff Publications 255 



National Air and Space Museum 259 



National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board 269 



Freer Gallery of Art 271 



National Collection of Fine Arts 281 



National Portrait Gallery 293 



National Gallery of Art 303 



John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts 321 



Other Smithsonian Activities 333 



Smithsonian Institution Libraries 335 



International Exchange Service 339 



Administrative Support Services 341 



Appendix 345 



1 . Report of the Executive Committee of the Board of Regents . . 347 



2. Smithsonian Foreign Currency Program Grants 375 



3. Publications of the Smithsonian Press 377 



4. Members of the Smithsonian Council 385 



5. Research Participation Program Appointments 391 



6. Staff of the Smithsonian Institution 397 



VI 




Statement by the Secretary 





Statement by the Secretary 

 S. Dillon Ripley 



The re-endorsement of the essential role of this Institution in 

 research and various processes of education came dramatically 

 this past year in the celebration of the two hundredth anni- 

 versary of the birth of James Smithson. The two and a half days 

 of the meetings, September 16-19, 1965, included an extraordi- 

 narily interesting seminar on the situation of man's knowledge 

 by scholars of international eminence. The twelve commissioned 

 papers have just been published.* During the celebration and 

 with great pageantry a robed procession of nearly five hundred 

 delegates of universities and kindred scholarly institutions, pre- 

 ceded by our mace bearer and banners of the various bureaus, 

 by members of the Smithsonian's Establishment, and by its 

 Chancellor and Regents, marched across the Mall. Thus we 

 restated the unique circumstance of our half-government, half- 

 private character, a symbolic composite, underscoring the spirit 

 of freedom of inquiry and freedom of scholarly exchange with all 

 nations of the world. 



President Lyndon B. Johnson addressed the assemblage with 

 significant words: "learning respects no geographic boundaries. 

 . . . partnership between Government and private enterprise 

 can serve the greater good of both. . . . the Institution 

 financed by Smithson breathed life in the idea that the growth 

 and spread of learning must be the first work of a nation that 

 seeks to be free. . . . We can support Secretary Ripley's 

 dream of creating a center here at the Smithsonian where great 

 scholars from every nation will come and collaborate. . . . 

 Together we must embark on a new and a noble adventure: 



* Knowledge Among Men (New York: Simon and Schuster for the Smithsonian 

 Institution, June 1966), the first in a new series to be known as the Smithsonian 

 Annual. 



1 




2 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



"First, to assist the education effort of the developing nations 

 and the developing regions. 



"Second, to help our schools and universities increase their 

 knowledge of the world and the people who inhabit it. 



"Third, to advance the exchange of students and teachers who 

 travel and work outside their native lands. 



"Fourth, to increase the free flow of books and ideas and art, 

 of works of science and imagination. 



"And, fifth, to assemble meetings of men and women from 

 every discipline and every culture to ponder the common prob- 

 lems of mankind."* 



The Smithsonian hopes to work closely with the appropriate 

 branches of Government in international scholarly meetings in 

 furtherance of its traditional and pioneering international role. 



RESEARCH 



Our research accomplishments during the year have spread 

 over a wide spectrum in science, history and art. 



An accomplishment of particular significance has been 

 achieved by David L. Correll in the field of protein chemistry. 

 One of the studies in this area has been the isolation of phy to- 

 chrome, a proteinaceous pigment occurring in all higher forms 

 of plants. This pigment serves as a photoreceptor that absorbs 

 the radiant energy which regulates the morphological develop- 

 ment of plants and that is controlled by the red and far-red 

 portions of the visible spectrum. Without phytochrome there 

 would presumably, be no stem elongation, no leaf expansion, 

 and no flowering in the higher plants. It is only in the past 

 few years that this pigment has been isolated, and then in impure 

 form. Dr. Correll has isolated phytochrome in pure form and, 

 with collaborators from the National Institutes of Health, has 

 determined its amino acid content, molecular weight, and fluo- 

 rescence spectrum, information that will undoubtedly lead to 

 defining the metabolic role and physiological responses occurring 

 as a result of the pigment's regulatory action. 



In astrophysics the culmination of a 10-year effort in the 

 geodetic phase of the Smithsonian's Satellite-Tracking Program 



*The Noble Adventure, Remarks of the President at the Smithsonian Bicentennial 

 Celebration, September 16,1965 (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1965). 




The Regents and the Secretary 



of the 



Smithsonian Institution 



request the honor of your presence 



at the Bicentennial Celebration 



commemorating the two hundredth anniversary 



of the birth of 



JAMES SMITHSON 



Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, 



September Sixteenth, Seventeenth, and Eighteenth, 



one thousand nine hundred and sixty-five 



at the Smithsonian Institution 



Washington, District of Columbia 



The favor of a reply 

 is requested 




THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON 



TO THE 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



THE President, Council and Fellows of the Royal 

 Society of London send their greetings and congratu- 

 lations to the Smithsonian Institution on the occasion 

 of the two hundredth anniversary of the birth of its founder 

 James Smithson. 



The Royal Society is happy to recall that James Smith- 

 son was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society on 19 April 

 1787 at a very early age, and contributed a number of 

 scientific papers to its Philosophical Transactions. 



The Royal Society has followed with admiration the 

 splendid way in which the Smithsonian Institution has 

 developed over the years since its foundation in 1846, and 

 has fulfilled the wish of its founder by the great contribu- 

 tion it has made to the increase and diffusion of knowledge 

 among men. 



The Royal Society confidently expresses the hope that 

 the Smithsonian Institution may long continue its valuable 

 contributions to the increase of knowledge and the welfare 

 of mankind. 



fCc 



crrj 



PRISSWENT 

 SEPTEM13EH 1965 




James Smithson Bicentennial Cele- 

 bration guests were registered 

 September 16, 1965, in the great 

 hall of the Smithsonian building. 

 Renovated and refurbished in the 

 spirit of architect James Ren- 

 wick's design, the hall's red and 

 gold carpets, marbleized pillars, 

 and plush settees convey a sense 

 of Victorian elegance of the 

 period (1850-1860) when it was 

 built. Harmonizing modern cases 

 display objects that illustrate 

 the wide range of Smithsonian 

 activities. 




Secretary S. Dillon Ripley ^left) and Science Information Exchange Associate 

 Director Frank J. Kreysa greet museum directors from Czechoslovakia: 

 Vladimir Denkenstein, National Museum, Prague; Jan Jelinek, Moravian 

 Museum, Brno; and Joseph Kuba, Technical Museum, Prague. Below: 

 Foreign Currency Program Director Kennedy B. Schmertz with Mohamed 

 Yacoub, Director of the Musee National du Bardo, and Mohamed Masmoudi 

 of the Musee Regional de Sfax. 




Smithsonian Secretary's badge of office, worn about the neck from a cherry-red 

 ribbon, depicts the owl of Athena, symbol of wisdom. Below: Chief Justice 

 Earl Warren, Chancellor of the Smithsonian, greets former Secretary 

 Charles G. Abbot, before robing for the Academic Procession. 




From the rampart behind the statue of Joseph Henry, the Smithsonian's first 

 Secretary, Tower Musicians have sounded a fanfare and the Herald has 

 read President Johnson's proclamation on the occasion of the Bicentennial 

 Celebration. Below: Preceeded by banners of the Smithsonian bureaus, 

 procession of nearly 500 scholars from 90 nations march in the order of the 

 founding of their institutions. 




The Procession: Chancellor Earl Warren and Secretary Ripley. Below: 

 Three past Secretaries of the Smithsonian (from left) Charles G. Abbot 

 (1928-1944), Alexander Wetmore (1945-1952), and Leonard Carmichael 

 (1953-1964). (Photo courtesy Washington Star.) 



230-457—66- 




After the Procession, President Lyndon B. Johnson addressed the convocation. 

 He announced support of the plan to create at the Smithsonian a center 

 "where great scholars from every nation will come and collaborate." 




Guests of the Celebration were served meals in colorful pavilions on the Mall, 

 in front of the Museum of History and Technology. Below: At the exhibit 

 "The Art and Spirit of a People," featuring objects from the Eleanor and 

 Mabel Van Alstyne collection, were gathered speakers who were to address 

 the scholarly sessions (from left) : Fred L. Whipple, Ian McTaggart Cowan, 

 Stephen E. Toulmin, Arthur Koestler, G. Evelyn Hutchinson, Claude 

 Levi-Strauss, Herbert Butterfield, and Jerome S. Bruner. 




The scholarly sessions were held in the Departmental Auditorium. The 

 Auditorium is located on Constitution Avenue, opposite the Museum 

 of History and Technology. Below: Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson and Secre- 

 tary Ripley greet Bicentennial Celebration guests at the White House lawn 

 party and reception Friday afternoon, September 17. 




Thomas Boylston Adams, president of the Massachusetts Historical Society 

 and descendant of two Presidents, addressed the banquet that concluded 

 the Bicentennial Celebration. Below: At the banquet Lord Florey, President 

 of the Royal Society of London, exhibits the citation accompanying award 

 of the first Smithson Medal to the Royal Society. Robert V. Fleming 

 (right), Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Board of Regents, 

 made the presentation. Sir Patrick Dean, British Ambassador, is at left. 




Smithson Medal, awarded for outstanding contributions in the areas of art, 

 science, history, and technology. A bronze copy of the medal was presented 

 to each guest at the Celebration. 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 3 



was reached with the completion of the Smithsonian Standard 

 Earth, a determination of the gravitational field and figure of 

 the earth and of observing-site positions accurate to within 10 

 to 20 meters. Observations of Explorers 19 and 24, the first 

 balloon satellites placed in near-polar orbits, led Luigi Jacchia 

 and Jack Slowey of the Observatory to the conclusion that, in 

 addition to solar heating, the earth's magnetic field plays a 

 role in the formation of the daytime "bulge" of the earth's 

 upper atmosphere in the rarefied air 600 kilometers (400 miles) 

 above the surface of the earth. 



These impressive dividends of fundamental discovery add 

 greatly to the value of the satellite-tracking program entrusted 

 to the Smithsonian by the National Aeronautics and Space 

 Administration. 



The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory Star Catalog, originally 

 compiled for satellite-tracking use, was printed with the aid of 

 electronic computers. A 4-volume catalog of some 260,000 

 stars, it contains data that heretofore had to be sought in more 

 than 50 catalogs. 



Significant advances in meteorite research in the Museum ol 

 Natural History included the intensive study of the minute 

 inclusions of glass in the chondrules of stony meteorites. This 

 glass is proof of the original molten state of these enigmatic 

 bodies, and its nature provides evidence of conditions during a 

 very early stage in the history of the solar system. 



Tektite investigations continued cooperatively with colleagues 

 at the Corning Glass works and the U.S. Geological Survey. 

 Emphasis was placed on the study of artificial glass systems of 

 tektite composition. A particularly interesting series of experi- 

 ments demonstrated that artificial glasses prepared from geologi- 

 cally old raw materials can give potassium-argon ages for the glass 

 as high as five million years. This ties in with our studies of 

 tektites from Central Australia, which have established that a 

 serious discrepancy exists between their young geological age 

 and the much greater age indicated for them by potassium-argon 

 measurements. These findings may indicate that the currently 

 accepted interpretation of the potassium-argon method as 

 applied to tektites needs reexamination. 



Toward the end of the fiscal year, the new Smithsonian Office 

 of Anthropology was engaged in preliminary planning for sev- 




4 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



eral major new research programs under the leadership ot 

 Professor Sol Tax, who on January 1, 1966, was appointed special 

 adviser on anthropology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian 

 Institution. 



Inspired by Professor Claude Levi-Strauss' address at the 

 Bicentennial Celebration, planning began for a large-scale pro- 

 gram in salvage or urgent ethnology, our part of which is now 

 called the Smithsonian Research Program on Changing Cultures. 



For at least a century anthropologists have understood a 

 main purpose of their field investigations to be the recording of 

 data on cultures undergoing change. Even when the focus of 

 their research was different, most field workers have felt that in a 

 sense they were producing primary historical documents on a 

 unique cultural situation which would never again be quite the 

 same, if indeed it would not soon be totally unrecognizable. 

 From the beginnings of the field study of human cultures a sense 

 of urgency has been created by the awareness that there were too 

 few anthropologists to keep up with this culture change. 



In the last 15 or 20 years this sense of urgency has become 

 more intense as it has become obvious that the course of indus- 

 trialization and "modernization" and the rapid development of 

 means of communication have so speeded up culture change all 

 over the world that the disappearance within the near future 

 of a very large part of the cultural variability of mankind can be 

 foreseen, perhaps even the disappearance of most of that cultural 

 variation which is important to anthropology and crucial for 

 the testing of anthropological hypotheses. At the same time the 

 study of culture and society has advanced to the point where we 

 are more aware of the theoretical importance, actual or con- 

 ceivable, of the data we are losing. It is no longer only historical 

 or antiquarian interests that are threatened by the rapid trans- 

 formation or disappearance of ancient cultural traditions. While 

 it is true that all cultures change at all times, it can hardly be 

 denied that the present situation is qualitatively different, and 

 that anthropology is in danger of losing the largest portion of 

 its laboratory just at the time when investigators have become 

 able to use it most effectively. 



To assist SOA in planning an attack on this problem, an 

 advisory conference with financial support from the Wenner- 

 Gren Foundation was held in Washington on April 10-12. 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 5 



This was attended by 29 anthropologists from abroad and 1 1 

 from the U.S. (in addition to Smithsonian anthropologists). As 

 a result, the Smithsonian now plans to take a leading role in 

 the rapid increase in anthropological field research that is 

 required. 



J. Lawrence Angel during the summer of 1965 studied skeletons 

 from the first farming populations on the Anatolian plateau 

 (Qatal Huyuk) and on the Macedonian plain (Nea Nikomedeia), 

 dating to the 7th and 6th millennia B.C. About a quarter of 

 the 59 skulls from these sites, located in marshy areas, show a 

 virtual doubling of marrow space (diploe) and another third 

 show lesser signs of this porotic hyperostosis. This is the bony 

 expression of anemia, probably thalassemia and sicklemia. Since 

 the heterozygotes carrying genes for these conditions have in- 

 creased resistance to falciparum malaria, this early occurrence of 

 severe porotic hyperostosis at these easy-to-cultivate marshy 

 sites, but not at early sites in dry areas (Kephala, Khirokitia, 

 etc.), implies that falciparum malaria increased greatly in some 

 areas as man settled down in farming villages. This finding- 

 parallels Livingstone's observations on modern sicklemia in 

 Liberia, and suggests that in the early Eastern Mediterranean 

 we are getting close to the provenience of origin of the mutation 

 which produced Plasmodium falciparum from the better tolerated 

 parasite P. malar iae. 



The Smithsonian Office of Anthropology in December 1965 

 inaugurated a new series, Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology, 

 that replaces the Institution's former series in anthropology. 

 The new series introduces a larger size, double-column page, 

 with a format that makes for a more effective presentation of 

 illustrations, and its subject matter is not restricted to one 

 geographical region as was that of the older series. Volume 1 is 

 a definitive monograph on one aspect of the archeological work 

 that the Smithsonian Institution conducted cooperatively with 

 the late Emilio Estrada of Guayaquil, Ecuador, from 1954 

 through 1961. 



Written by Betty J. Meggers, Clifford Evans, and Emilio 

 Estrada, the study, Early Formative Period of Coastal Ecuador: 

 The Valdivia and Machalilla Phases, suggests that the earliest 

 pottery making culture in South America is the Valdivia Phase, 

 dated by carbon- 14 at between 5 1 50 ± 150 and 42 70 ±60 years 




6 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



ago, and it argues provocatively that the pottery is a trans-Pacific 

 introduction by an accidental drift from the Island of Kyushu, 

 Japan. In addition to this speculative hypothesis the study 

 adds considerable information on the culture sequences of the 

 Andean area of South America, especially concerning the highly 

 important transition from wild food collecting to the introduction 

 of agriculture. 



The bamboos, economically one of the most important 

 groups of flowering plants, received a fresh treatment in Floyd A. 

 McClure's work The Bamboos published in 1966. The book, 

 based on a lifetime of experience, deals with the propagation 

 and use of this versatile plant, as well as with its morphology and 

 taxonomy. 



Too often treated only from the classical and traditional view- 

 points, the algae and other marine plants are difficult subjects 

 for study in the classroom. E. Yale Dawson's new book, Marine 

 Botany, presents a concise and readable text in a single volume 

 especially adapted for class use. There are sections on marine 

 flowering plants, food chains, algal physiology, commercial uses 

 of algae, and algal ecology, as well as the systematics of algae, 

 the sum of which has never appeared before in a college textbook 

 in English. Dawson's book transects disciplinary lines within 

 the broad field of marine botany and is certain to become a 

 model of its kind. 



In a single step, the Smithsonian Institution has now become 

 one of the important repositories of algal specimens in the United 

 States. By securing the marine herbarium of the Beaudette 

 Foundation and by negotiating a long-term loan for the algal 

 herbarium of the Hancock Foundation, the Institution now has 

 outstanding competence for research on the marine floras ol 

 Pacific North America and the islands of Oceania. These rapid 

 advances were the result of the energy and resourcefulness of 

 Dawson, who had rapidly established a vigorous program of 

 algal research and collection at the Smithsonian during the 

 past year, prior to his tragic death in Egypt in June 1966. 



Ostracodes are microscopic arthropods that leave an abundant 

 fossil record. The history to be learned from their remains 

 may reflect changes in shorelines, formation of estuaries, drying 

 up of lakes, and elevation or depression of the deep ocean 

 floor. Dr. Richard H. Benson and his associate Dr. Rosalie F. 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 7 



Maddocks, who recently have been active participants in the 

 International Indian Ocean Expedition, are studying modern 

 ostracode faunas from many parts of the world, with the double 

 objective of developing more precise methods of making his- 

 torical and environmental interpretations from fossil ostracode 

 assemblages and of contributing to a fuller understanding of 

 the history of the ocean basins. Computer analysis of species 

 distribution patterns in coral reef environments of northern 

 Madagascar has reaffirmed the trustworthiness and usefulness 

 of ostracode assemblages as sensitive indicators of environmental 

 change. A similar analysis of Arctic and northern Pacific ostra- 

 codes has successfully demonstrated that the Bering Strait has 

 not been a significant passageway for migration of marine 

 bottom-dwelling animals, at least since the beginning of the 

 Ice Age. 



This past year important field studies on Lepidoptera were 

 undertaken by Donald R. Davis in the Philippines in concert 

 with scientists from San Carlos University. An unsuspected 

 relict Paleartic fauna was discovered on Mount Apo in southern 

 Mindanao Island. The only previously known relict Temperate 

 Zone insect fauna in the Philippines had been known from 

 northern Luzon, far to the north. Presence of certain birds such 

 as the Mount Apo bullfinch and the newly discovered Mindanao 

 serin finch tend to underscore the importance of the highlands 

 of Mindanao as refugia for old, relict invasion animals and 

 plants. 



During a trip to Egypt, the new chairman of the department 

 of entomology, Karl V. Krombein, made an exchange which 

 has brought to our collections a few of the stored-products pests 

 found in alabaster vases from the tomb of Tutankhamen. These 

 represent several extant species of beetles whose larvae feed on 

 dried vegetable matter, such as cracked grains, spices, or milled 

 products. The beetles, recovered from tightly sealed vases, 

 definitely date from the year of Tutankhamen's burial some 

 3,500 years ago. Except for fossilized forms, these are the oldest 

 insects in the Smithsonian collections. 



Since July 1965 the department of vertebrate zoology has 

 become increasingly involved in the development of research 

 programs which depend for their success on collaborative rela- 

 tionships with scientists representing a variety of disciplines. 




8 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Although some of the programs to be mentioned below involve 

 groups of organisms other than vertebrates, Smithsonian par- 

 ticipation in these programs has stemmed from the enthusiastic 

 interest of its vertebrate zoologists. 



Through the support of the Office of Ecology under Helmut K. 

 Buechner, the department of vertebrate zoology in January 1966 

 participated in the establishment of the Area de Pesquisas 

 Ecologicas do Guama (APEG), Belem, Brazil. APEG was es- 

 tablished through a series of official announcements by Dr. Jose 

 Maria Conduru, Director of the Instituto de Pesquisas e Esperi- 

 mentacao Agropecuarias do Norte (IPEAN). In addition, a 

 Commission for the Coordination of Research Activities was 

 formed to review and coordinate research at APEG. A pri- 

 mary objective of APEG is the establishment of a broad program 

 of basic research on the ecology of the Amazonian forest — one 

 which will also offer scientific training directly related to re- 

 gional needs. Both the Smithsonian and IPEAN are collabo- 

 rating in the development of a scientific program for APEG 

 through the provision of grants from the Smithsonian and of 

 facilities, personnel, and equipment from IPEAN. From this 

 support have sprung research programs on soils, botany, ento- 

 mology, and epidemiology. Other institutions participating 

 with IPEAN and the Smithsonian are the Belem Virus Labora- 

 tory (Instituto Evandro Chagas), the Museu Paraense Emilio 

 Goeldi, the Escola de Agronomia de Amazonia (Belem), the 

 University of Brasilia, the Faculdade de Filosofia (Rio Claro, 

 Sao Paulo), and INPA (Manaus). These institutions are all 

 represented in the membership of the Commission for the 

 Coordination of Research Activities on APEG. 



The Smithsonian Institution historically has a deep interest in 

 problems of tropical biology, in which perhaps over half its 

 scientists have at one time or another specialized, especially in 

 Brazil and adjacent countries of northern Latin America. The 

 recently renamed Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute 

 (STRI — formerly the Canal Zone Biological Area), which ad- 

 ministers the Barro Colorado Station in the Panama Canal 

 Zone, has a continuing role to play in the expansion of collabo- 

 rative activities with Latin American scientists. It has estab- 

 lished marine stations in the Panama area at Fort Amador on 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 9 



the Pacific and at Galeta Island on the Atlantic. Important 

 work in tropical animal ecology is proceeding at STRI under 

 Dr. Moynihan's vigorous direction. Some of these studies are 

 outlined further on in this report. 



We view these components of our activities as a valid and 

 highly productive part of the developing United States segment 

 of the International Biological Program. 



Activities in history at the Smithsonian include research into 

 and eventual publication on a wide variety of problems in the 

 history of various aspects of science and military and naval 

 history as well as the history of economics and technology. 



Howard I. Chapelle has completed a history of ship design in 

 the United States during the period of sail. The book will be 

 published next winter by Norton under the title Search for Speed 

 Under Sail in North America, 1700-1855. 



Elvira Clain-Stefanelli published what we believe to be the 

 first up-to-date history of numismatic research, "Numismatics, 

 An Ancient Science," (Paper 32 in Contributions from the Museum 

 of History and Technology, 1965). 



Bernard S. Finn completed an elaborate study of the telephone 

 research of A. G. Bell, based upon experimental study of the 

 characteristics of the original instruments in our collection. 

 Publication is expected in the Smithsonian Journal of History. 



Sami K. Hamarneh completed a catalog of the medical 

 manuscripts in one of the most important Near Eastern libraries, 

 the Zahiriyah National Library, Damascus, Syria. The work 

 (in Arabic) will be published in Syria. This work was supported 

 in part by a grant from the Fluid Research Fund. 



Melvin H. Jackson is undertaking, with a Dutch collaborator, 

 the preparation for publication of an extraordinary collection of 

 18th-century drawings of the operations of the Royal Brass 

 Foundry at Woolwich, England. 



Peter C. Welsh organized and carried out two notable special 

 exhibits, "The Art and Spirit of a People" and "The Trotter in 

 America," both of which involved recently acquired collections. 

 For each he prepared and the Smithsonian published a catalog. 



John H. White, Jr., has completed a manuscript, "Repre- 

 sentative American Locomotives Before 1880." This work 

 features engineering drawings of fifty locomotives, no less than 




10 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



half of which have not heretofore been represented by drawings. 

 This work was supported by a Smithsonian Research Awards 

 grant. 



Deborah J. Warner completed a biographical article (American 

 Scientist, vol. 54, 1966) on an unusually elusive figure in the 

 history of American astronomy — George Willis Ritchey (1864- 

 1945), who was the pioneer designer of big telescopes. 



In connection with work undertaken in furthering the eventual 

 development of the Armed Forces Museum, Assistant Director 

 J. S. Hutchins commenced a study of the development of horse 

 equipments used by cavalry, light artillery, and mounted in- 

 fantry troops in United States service. 



Research in the archives of the Smithsonian, developed during 

 the past year by Samuel T. Suratt, holds much promise for the 

 future. Much of the history of American scientific activity 

 during the 19th century reposes in these records and docu- 

 ments. A certain exposure of the value of these materials will 

 undoubtedly come through the work in future years of Nathan 

 Reingold on the Joseph Henry Papers, a project of paramount 

 importance in the history of science in America which we hope 

 will be undertaken under the sponsorship of the American 

 Philosophical Society, the National Academy of Sciences, and 

 the Smithsonian. 



This year marks the completion by John A. Pope of the 

 monumental work "The Freer Chinese Bronzes" to appear in 

 1967 in two volumes, it will be a major addition to the subject, 

 owing to the wide range and quality of the Freer collections. 



Continued vitality and energy has been evidenced in the work 

 of the National Collection of Fine Arts and the National Portrait 

 Gallery. Three exhibitions at the National Collection this 

 year included important catalogs containing research material 

 brought together by the staff: Mrs. Adelyn Breeskin's Roots of 

 Abstract Art in America 1910-1930; Richard Wunder's Frederic 

 Edwin Church, for a retrospective exhibit of the great American 

 landscapist; and David W. Scott's American Landscape, a Changing 

 Frontier. 



Both these galleries plan a major move during the coming year 

 into the imposing Patent Office building, a long-heralded event 

 of great importance to Washington and to the Nation, affording 

 as it will identity to these organizations, a sense of unity, and a 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 1 1 



strong commitment to research in American art, and in biogra- 

 phy and iconology. 



PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENTS 



Much of the life of the Smithsonian centers round the Mall, 

 that stretch of greensward which epitomizes for so many Ameri- 

 cans the very heart of the Nation's Capital. As a member of 

 the President's Temporary Commission on Pennsylvania Avenue 

 and the Mall, the Secretary of the Smithsonian is but demonstrat- 

 ing the historic interest which the Institution has always had in 

 the Mall and its surroundings. Under its original charter in 

 1846 the Smithsonian was granted a park encompassing land 

 on the south side of the Mall from Ninth to Twelfth Street. 

 Its first Secretary, professor Joseph Henry, was much concerned 

 with Smithsonian Park and wrote in his pocket diary in July 1848 



The idea has occurred to me that the Mall might be made one of 

 the most delightful places in the United States by filling up the 

 canal, planting the ground with clumps of native ornamental trees 

 and making a broad gravel road entering around the whole, extend- 

 ing from the foot of Capitol Hill to the Monument. This would 

 be one of the finest "drives" in the World. 



How right he was. The Mall can be and should remain one of 

 the most magnificent and beautiful spots in the world. The 

 Smithsonian is deeply committed to supporting and encouraging 

 all those concerned with the Mall in their plans for keeping it as 

 an inspiring and enlivening heartland for the American people. 

 Let it never be sterile and dull. Let it always be lively, vigorous, 

 restful, varied, and above all, beautiful. 



Plans proceed apace for preserving and renovating James 

 Renwick's delightful and entertaining Smithsonian castle on 

 the Mall. It is our plan that the spirit of Renwick's design 

 for this building will be preserved, but redesigned for amenities 

 in such a way that it will stand as visible symbol of the paramount 

 intellectual position and stature of the Institution it houses. 

 Renwick's designs were among thirteen submitted to the Special 

 Committee of the Regents who went in search of a building to 

 epitomize the Smithson bequest. Prominent among these was 

 Robert Dale Owen, Congressman from Indiana, whose taste 

 and style had such an impact on the early Smithsonian, and 

 whose brother David, the geologist, selected the stone for the 




12 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



building. His lineal descendant in Congress today, the Honor- 

 able Winfield K. Denton of Indiana, with whom the Secretary 

 journeyed this past summer to New Harmony to visit the home 

 of the Owens, has served as chairman of a subcommittee of the 

 House of Representatives charged with overseeing the Federal 

 appropriations of the Institution. It is a pleasant coincidence 

 indeed. 



The Regents chose Renwick after a searching survey of monu- 

 mental public buildings on the Eastern Seaboard which included 

 presumably not only Renwick's Grace Church (1843) and Saint 

 Patrick's Cathedral (1853-87) in New York City, but also such 

 outstanding buildings as the House of Refuge and the Eastern 

 Penitentiary in Philadelphia, and the State Lunatic Asylum in 

 Trenton. The subcommittee could hardly be accused of lack 

 of diligence. 



The proposed and dramatic moves of the National Collection 

 of Fine Arts and the National Portrait Gallery have already 

 been mentioned. This year plans are under way for the re- 

 design and renovation of the Smithsonian Arts and Industries 

 building of 1879-81 which stands on the Mall next to the 

 Renwick Castle. Now to be rechristened "Exposition Hall," 

 the building was designed by Clauss and Schultz in a fanciful 

 manner reminiscent, in plan, of the great 5th-century basilica 

 of St. Simon Stylites in the Syrian Desert. Just a few years 

 before Clauss and Schultz created their design, this remarkable 

 basilica, with its central octagon sending out four naves of equal 

 length, had been brought to the attention of the western world 

 by the Count de Vogue's monumental publication on the early 

 Christian buildings of Syria. He and subsequent scholars have 

 been uncertain whether the central octagon had been crowned 

 by a dome above the column on which the saint had sat in self- 

 mortification for over two decades. The American architects 

 thoughtfully provided us with a polygonal dome. Goode (1897)* 

 called the design "admirable" as an exhibition building, which 

 it is, but wrote that it is neither "externally or internally ... as 

 pleasing or dignified as would have resulted from the use of a 

 more expensive system of construction and more costly materials." 

 To be sure it was built of brick, but it is light and airy inside, 



*The Smithsonian Institution, 1846-1896, edit. George Brown Goode (Washing- 

 ton: Smithsonian Institution, 1897). 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 13 



and is indeed admirably designed for its purposes, as modern 

 architects like Buckminster Fuller would probably testify. It is, 

 moreover, a charming reminder of a whole period of "exposi- 

 tion" architecture. The Smithsonian is undertaking additional 

 studies to make its immediate surroundings in "Smithsonian 

 Park" more gracious and appealing, more in keeping with the 

 spirit of the Mall. 



Plans for another Renwick building, the original Corcoran 

 Art Gallery on Pennsylvania Avenue at Seventeenth Street, 

 are also under way. Recently used by the Court of Claims, 

 this stylish gallery, in a 17th-century French mode, amply de- 

 serves the renovation and restoration which the late President 

 Kennedy and the Fine Arts Commission under its talented 

 chairman William Walton decreed for it. President Johnson 

 has taken the keenest personal interest in its allocation to the 

 Smithsonian as a center for decorative arts and design where, 

 near Blair House, it can convey to foreign heads of state a 

 certain sense of the reality of American fine arts, style, and 

 aesthetic creation — part of the American dream. 



The most notable contributions of the President and Mrs. 

 Johnson to the artistic life of the capital, and indeed of the 

 Nation, occurred this year when, as a result of their direct con- 

 cern and intercession, Mr. Joseph H. Hirshhorn decided to 

 present his collection of nearly sixty-seven hundred objects of 

 painting and sculpture to the United States. The Smithsonian 

 will act as custodian of this vast collection, valued at in excess of 

 twenty-five million dollars. This is one of the three great art 

 events of this century in Washington, the others being the 

 Charles Lang Freer Gift of 1915 and the Andrew W. Mellon 

 gift of 1938, continued so munificently by himself and his chil- 

 dren. A site has now been chosen and approved by the 

 Congress for this great Hirshhorn collection. 



This year, too, marked the authorization of a National Air 

 and Space Museum building for the Museum that was first 

 established by Congress in 1946 as a Smithsonian bureau. This 

 Museum is destined to become a vital center for education and 

 historical research to which will come scholars, historians, and 

 professionals from many fields of learning to study its compre- 

 hensive reference collections. 



An additional and most important project of the year was the 



230-457—66 3 




14 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



creation of the Chesapeake Bay Center for Field Biology on 

 parcels of land known as Java Farm and Ivy Neck on the western 

 shore of Chesapeake Bay south of Annapolis. This research 

 center, a collaborative venture with the Johns Hopkins Uni- 

 versity and the University of Maryland, has been made possible 

 through the original bequest of Robert Lee Forrest, through a 

 most stimulating and seminal grant of $375,000 from the Ford 

 Foundation, and through the collaboration of the Colhoun 

 family, relatives of the late Miss Adelaide Murray, former 

 hereditary owner of Ivy Neck. More recently, a grant of 

 SI 00,000 from the Research Corporation has given the Smith- 

 sonian an additional most valued contribution toward the funds 

 needed to complete land acquisition. 



This past year has witnessed the setting up of the National 

 Foundation for the Arts and Humanities, with its component 

 Endowments, and the Federal Council on the Arts and Humani- 

 ties, of which latter body the Secretary has been asked to serve 

 as Chairman. This is an honor which the head of the Smith- 

 sonian accepts with the assumption that it has a certain signifi- 

 cance beyond mere symbolism. The relationships of the Foun- 

 dation, the two Endowments, other agencies of government and 

 the cultural scene generally deserve careful understanding and 

 analysis. To these relationships the development of the National 

 Science Foundation bears certain analogies. Above all, the 

 future relations of these Foundations to the components of 

 American education present fascinating opportunities for study 

 and instruction. Art is still largely free of directed, or fraternally 

 controlled management by the apparatus of education. The 

 directions taken by the humanities, on the other hand, depend 

 largely upon the interests of higher education, especially upon 

 research in the graduate departments of universities. 



The university is an omnium gatherum today in the United 

 States. As Robert Hutchins recently said, in addressing the 

 Fund for the Republic convocation on the university, held in Los 

 Angeles on May 8, 1966: "The responsibility of the professions 

 for the preparation and induction of neophytes, the operation of 

 training schools and research institutes outside the university, and 

 a break of the greatest significance between secondary and higher 

 education are the general rule in other countries," but are 




STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY 15 



unknown or exceptional in the United States [italics mine]. Every 

 other nation assigns some tasks of education, training and re- 

 search to other institutions. Nowhere else is it automatically 

 assumed that everything anybody wants by way of educational 

 experience beyond the high school or anything anybody would 

 like to see done by way of solving practical problems, collecting 

 data, investigating the universe, or cleaning up the landscape 

 may as a matter of course be a function of the university." 



Presumably the reason the National Foundation on the Arts 

 and Humanities is not a part of the Office of Education is in 

 partial recognition of the fact that support for the arts and 

 humanities should relate to people, to groups and organizations 

 not directly connected with the degree-granting processes. This 

 has often been a problem for the National Science Foundation, 

 which to some considerable extent has had to assume that science 

 is performed by groups in laboratories, and that priorities for 

 science may depend on relationships to national goals in educa- 

 tion. Let us hope that the arts and the humanities can remain 

 free from any dominating institutional pattern, on the highest 

 plane of creativity and original research. 



LEARNING 



The Smithsonian Institution is much interested in the present 

 condition of learning. We are concerned to relate our bureaus 

 and offices to those in higher education at various levels. The 

 Institution hopes to join with other institutions in the city to 

 foster an international center for advanced studies; we shall 

 continue to develop individual programs with universities. We 

 now have programs with 17 for the training of graduate students. 

 Last year 35 graduate students and 12 postdoctoral fellows 

 worked in bureaus of the Smithsonian, while some 50 under- 

 graduates had various term appointments to study at the Smith- 

 sonian, including summer training courses. All this is an appro- 

 priate evocation of our original purposes and our duty indeed to 

 the cause of learning. In the coming year we hope to extend 

 our work with students and specialists into a study of exhibit 

 techniques and audience responses which may prove to be of 

 direct benefit to the cause of education and its relation to the 

 state of learning in our country. 




16 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



STAFF CHANGES 



Important changes took place within the Secretary's immediate 

 staff during the year. Dr. Sidney R. Galler, formerly head of the 

 Biology Branch in the Office of Naval Research, was appointed to the 

 position of Assistant Secretary (Science). This position had been 

 unfilled since T. Dale Stewart's return to fulltime research in the Office 

 of Anthropology. 



A Public Information Office was established to bring together the 

 press office and other responsibilities for public information which had 

 been shared by several offices. The first director of the new office, 

 B. Richard Berg, came to the staff from the George Washington 

 University. 



After more than seven years of service as a staff assistant to the 

 Secretary, Dr. T. W. Taylor resigned to accept appointment as Deputy 

 Commissioner, Bureau of Indian Affairs. 



Robert G. Cunningham, who had joined the staff in 1964 to organize 

 the Smithson Bicentennial Celebration and later to mar age the 

 Development Office, left the Institution to return to secondary 

 education. 



The Institution's largest museums gained new directors. Dr. 

 Richard S. Cowan, a member of the department of botany from 1957 

 and Assistant Director of the Museum of National History since 1 962, 

 became Director of the Museum, succeeding T. Dale Stewart. Dr. 

 Robert P. Multhauf was appointed the second director of the Museum 

 of History and Technology after John C. Ewers' return to the Office of 

 Anthropology as senior scientist. 



Upon the retirement of Paul H. Oehser as Chief, Editorial and 

 Publication Division, Anders Richter came to the Institution from the 

 University of Chicago Press. Under Mr. Richter's direction this 

 division has been reorganized into the Smithsonian Press. 

 THE BOARD OF REGENTS 



The membership of the Board of Regents remained unchanged. 

 The roll of Regents at the close of the fiscal year is given on page iii. 



The customary informal dinner meeting, preceding the annual 

 meeting, was held on January 26, 1966, in the Great Hall of the 

 Smithsonian Institution Building. Dr. Harold Stern, Assistant Director 

 of the Freer Gallery, spoke on Japanese hand scrolls; Mr. Charles Olin, 

 Chief of the Conservation Laboratory, spoke on the Smithsonian's new 

 conservation program. Mr. Donald McClelland, Assistant to the 

 Director of the National Collection of Fine Arts, gave a presentation 

 on the White House Art Project. The annual meeting was held on 

 January 27, 1966, in the Regents Room. 




OFFICE OF THE REGISTRAR 17 



The spring meeting of the Board of Regents was held on May 1 7, 

 1966, in the Regents Room. At the conclusion of the meeting a brief 

 installation ceremony was held in the Great Hall to recognize the 

 recent appointments of Dr. Richard S. Cowan as Director of the 

 Museum of Natural History and Dr. Robert P. Multhauf as Director 

 of the Museum of History and Technology. The reception was followed 

 by an informal dinner in the Associates Hall. 



FINANCES 



Federal funds appropriated to the Institution for its regular operations 

 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1966, totaled $18,921,000 and were 

 obligated as follows (Appendix 1 contains a report on the private funds 

 of the Institution) : 



Astrophysical Observatory $1, 164, 000 



International Activities 31,000 



International Exchange Service 121, 000 



National Air and Space Museum 385, 000 



National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board 91, 000 



National Collection of Fine Arts 430, 000 



National Portrait Gallery 258, 000 



Radiation Biology Laboratory 336, 000 



Tropical Research Institute 213, 000 



United States National Museum 7, 013, 000 



Research Awards 335, 000 



Office of the Secretary 324, 000 



Management Support 237, 000 



Buildings Management Department 6, 063, 000 



Administrative Services 1, 894, 000 



Unobligated 26, 000 



VISITORS 



Visitors to the six buildings comprising the Smithsonian complex 

 on the Mall this year totaled 12,150,854, of whom 3,895,758 came in 

 July and August. The greatest number of visitors for a single day was 

 114,441 on April 9, 1966. The tabulation on page 18 gives a sum 

 mary of attendance records for the six buildings. The National 

 Zoological Park had an estimated 4,383,463 visitors during the year. 

 This figure, added to the attendance in the Institution's buildings on 

 the Mall, and to the record 1,577,108 at the National Gallery of Art, 

 brings the total Smithsonian attendance for fiscal 1965 to 18,111,425. 




18 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



> 



£ 



-*•*■*— 't>CDOCD-*COOCD 



o — ' cd m m cd m 



* N O O) + CO (N 



^" * -<" 10 cT * rC co" 

 tocoootococor-- 

 coor^toiococMcoincoco^ — < 



— T cm — «" — " —" cm 



iDco-HNtocoroio- . — > m r~» 

 o^focMr^ocDCDCMcoTfin 



cm" cm" cm" o" •*" cm" oo" rf co" r>T o" co" 



co—'cDtOiOLnOcoocoinco 



u 



^ C ... *CNICfl-H-.^CON01*O)CD 



S.3 §P ^COCDCMCOLnCM-^r^CDt^CD 



ft K-S m CM ^-> — Tf-CMtDOcOrt-OCM 



° t; "« «„„„„„--,..,-., 



;r 1; "a „ss r^coocotOTfco^r^mcDco 



O ^hS'-Q CM CO ^ CM — i CM 



Q 



o 

 u 



mcocDcoocDr^cO'^'t^.cocD 



cocotoi^tDco-- | cor^tocT>m 

 CMtcr^-^cD-*T^O'^'--'CMO 



■*" cd" cm" — <" m" cm" 



r SQ3 



_, „ _ CO 



3 cu 



< co O Z Q >— ih 2 < 2 



-9 -° b J? u 



S fl 8 S -fl H 




Smithsonian Activities 



Office of the Secretary 





OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES 



William W. Warner, Director 



On March 7, 1966, the Institution established an Office of Inter- 

 national Activities. William W. Warner, who joined the Smithsonian 

 staff in March of 1 964 as a consultant to the Secretary, was named its 

 first Director. 



Broadly conceived, the role of the Office of International Activities 

 is to promote international programs in those disciplines or fields of 

 study which find relatively little support from other sources, and in 

 particular, those areas of basic research in the sciences and humanities 

 where further advancement of knowledge in this country requires 

 continuing and strong cooperative research programs with other 

 nations. These programs benefit not only the Smithsonian, but many 

 other American institutions. The Office also serves as the Institution's 

 point of liaison with government agencies and international organiza- 

 tions dealing with international matters of interest to the Smithsonian. 



The Director represents the Institution on such working groups as 

 the Department of State's Interagency Council on International 

 Educational and Cultural Affairs, which is a policy-making body for 

 government-sponsored exchange of persons programs; the Cultural 

 Activities Committee of the United States National Commission for 

 UNESCO; and the International Committee of the National Trust 

 for Historic Preservation. 



Beyond these basic responsibilities, the Office also helps other 

 elements of the Smithsonian in the establishment of research projects 

 or exhibit programs which involve substantial participation of foreign 

 institutions or the international exchange of scholars. Examples range 

 from an Archeological Survey of Brazil to a proposed scientist-exchange 

 program with the Leningrad Institute of Zoology. Once established, 

 some of these programs are directly administered by the Office of 

 International Activities. More often, however, they are administered 

 by the organizational units within the Smithsonian that are most 

 interested or have greatest competence in the subject matter of the 

 program. 



SPECIAL FOREIGN CURRENCY PROGRAM 



Fiscal Year 1966 saw the Smithsonian receive its first appropriation 

 of excess foreign currencies deriving from the sale of agricultural 



21 




22 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



surplus under Public Law 480, in order to undertake a grant program 

 for archeological excavation or research in the so-called excess- currency 

 countries. At the beginning of the year Kennedy B. Schmertz, a 

 former Foreign Service Officer with experience in the Near East, was 

 appointed director of the Smithsonian's Foreign Currency Program 

 within the Office of International Activities. By the end of the year, 

 a total of $1,250,000 in foreign currencies had been granted to some 

 21 American universities or museums. (A list of grants is found in 

 Appendix 2 ) 



Among the major recipients of first-year grants were the American 

 Research Center in Egypt and the Hebrew Union College-Jerusalem 

 School of Archeology. The former is a consortium of ten American 

 universities, with headquarters in Boston, Massachusetts, and an 

 overseas office in Cairo, which was established in 1948 to facilitate 

 the research or excavations of the member institutions in Egypt. 

 The Smithsonian's grant permitted the Center to field six archeological 

 projects during the 1966 season, ranging from the excavation of Fustat 

 near modern Cairo, which was a great Arab capital and trading 

 center in the Middle Ages, destroyed during the Crusades, to a study of 

 the hieroglyphics of the temples of Rameses II at Karnak. The 

 Hebrew Union-Jerusalem School of Archeology grant was used to 

 support a seminar on Near Eastern Civilization for American graduate 

 students and to excavate at Gezer in southern Israel. This excavation 

 uncovered a massive "cyclopean" defense tower dating from the 19th 

 century B.C. and provided the first archeological proof that the city 

 of Gezer was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. 



In the exercise of this program, the Institution has been especially 

 interested in supporting projects in those excess-currency countries 

 where American institutions have had little or no opportunity for 

 archeological investigation. For this reason special attention was 

 given to the establishment of the American Academy of Benares 

 through a grant to the American Institute of Indian Studies at Poona, 

 a research center administered by the University of Pennsylvania. 

 The guiding purpose of the Academy at Benares is quite clear. Experts 

 have long maintained that the archeology and art history of India are 

 so rich that often the most difficult question is where to begin. The 

 Benares Academy seeks to answer this question by conducting long- 

 range surveys which will document, record, and photograph ancient 

 temples and both above-ground and below-ground archeological 

 sites throughout India, as a prerequisite to the determination of in- 

 telligent research priorities. With the appointment of Dr. Pramod 

 Chandra of the University of Chicago as resident director, the 

 Academy began operations in September 1965 in the historic Rewa 




OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES 23 



Palace building generously provided by the Hindu University of 

 Benares. Shortly after establishment of the Academy, the Smith- 

 sonian was pleased to acknowledge a grant of $56,750 from the John 

 D. Rockefeller III Fund to meet the necessary dollar costs which are 

 mainly for equipment unobtainable in India and for the travel within 

 the United States of Indian scholars connected with the Academy. 



Other noteworthly achievements during the first year of the Foreign 

 Currency Program include: 



The Peabody Museum of Natural History of Yale University 

 excavations of the El Fayum badlands of Egypt, which have unearthed 

 fossil remains of the oldest known land mammal of the African Tertiary 

 and various examples of Oligocene primates ancestral to both man and 

 the apes. 



The University of Missouri-Corning Museum of Glass survey 

 and excavations of ancient glass factories along the Phoenician coast 

 of Israel, which uncovered a massive nine-ton slab of opaque raspberry 

 colored glass in an abandoned cistern of the ancient city of Beth 

 She'arim. The site has since been converted into a small museum. 



The award of a joint dollar-foreign currency grant, with the 

 Atomic Energy Commission, to the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory 

 of the University of California, to test the practicability of X-raying 

 Egyptian pyramids for unknown interior chambers. The first tests 

 are being made on the Second Pyramid at Giza. 



As the Smithsonian's Foreign Currency Program developed through 

 the year, the Institution received many expressions of interest and 

 support from American scholars, the Congress, and United States 

 Embassies abroad. Ambassador Chester Bowles in a letter to Secretary 

 Ripley urged the Institution to become more and more involved in 

 promoting archeological studies in India. Professor Robert Adams, 

 Director of the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago, charac- 

 terized the program as "an important breakthrough in funding 

 overseas research in archeology and related disciplines." Congress- 

 man Leonard Farbstein, in the course of House hearings on the 

 utilization of U.S. -owned foreign currencies, commended the .Smith- 

 sonian for the rapidity and efficiency with which its program was 

 established and termed it "a very satisfactory addition to the manner 

 of disposition of the funds that we have been collecting in these various 

 countries." 



Toward the close of the year under review, the Congress granted 

 the Smithsonian a substantially increased foreign currency appro- 

 priation and also authority to extend the program to other fields of 

 Smithsonian interest, especially projects in systematic and environ- 

 mental biology which support the goals of the International Biological 




24 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Program. With this in mind, the Director travelled to Yugoslavia 

 and Poland in the spring of 1 966 to explore the possibilities for support- 

 ing binational research projects using excess currencies in both those 

 countries. Similar program explorations were carried out in Tunisia, 

 Guinea, Pakistan, and Ceylon. 



EXCHANGE OF PERSONS PROGRAMS 



By a working agreement with the State Department's Bureau of 

 Educational and Cultural Affairs, the Smithsonian Office of Inter- 

 national Activities advises the State Department and other federal 

 or private organizations on promising candidates for international 

 exchange programs in fields of Smithsonian competence. Suggestions 

 concerning American scholars to fill Fulbright and other openings 

 abroad are usually forwarded to the Conference Board of Associated 

 Research Councils. Suggestions concerning foreign scholars or museum 

 curators who might benefit from study at the Smithsonian or kindred 

 institutions in the United States are forwarded through the Depart- 

 ment to Cultural Affairs Officers in U.S. Embassies overseas. 



In addition, the Office helps in or assumes total responsibility for 

 programming the visits of foreign grantees coming to the United States 

 under State Department or other exchange programs. Following the 

 Smithson Bicentennial, a six-week study and observation tour was 

 arranged for Dr. Mehmet Onder, Director of Antiquities of the Turkish 

 Ministry of Education, and Dr. Raci Temezer, Director of the Hittite 

 Museum in Ankara, as well as one-week tours for Dr. Hamit Kosay, 

 Director of the Ethnographic Museum of Turkey, and Dr. Tahsin 

 Dolunay, Director of the Topkapi Museum in Istanbul. Following 

 their return to Turkey, the United States Embassy in Ankara reported 

 that the visits of these museum directors had been instrumental in 

 creating a favorable climate for increased exchange of exhibits and 

 increased opportunities for American archeologists wishing to work in 

 Turkey. Dr. Kosay published an account of his visit and his observa- 

 tions of the Smithsonian in the Bulletin of the Turkish Historical Society. 



From January to March 1966, Joseph A. Patterson, Director of the 

 American Association of Museums, made extensive visits to museums 

 in the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and the Far East. The purpose of 

 this trip, funded and planned by the Office of International Activities, 

 was first to determine what needs to be done by museums in the develop- 

 ing world in order to better realize their potential for public education 

 and second what American museums can do to help. Mr. Patterson 

 discovered that the priority need, common to all countries visited, was 

 for trained museum personnel, before improved facilities. Although 

 physical plants and exhibit facilities are in most cases inadequate, 




OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES 25 



Mr. Patterson found that foreign museum directors themselves under- 

 stood that new museums or new exhibit techniques cannot be success- 

 fully planned or maintained without at least a strong nucleus of trained 

 museum professionals in each country. Highlights of his trip included 

 a meeting with Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India, who expressed 

 herself as extremely interested in museum education, and conferences 

 with Korean officials which laid a firm groundwork for the establish- 

 ment of a National Science Museum in Seoul. 



Brief conferences and observation tours with the Smithsonian's 

 scientific or administrative staff were arranged for a total of 37 foreign 

 grantees coming through Washington under State Department, Agency 

 for International Development, Department of Health, Education and 

 Welfare, and other auspices. A number of these visitors were ranking 

 government officials interested in learning about the organization of 

 the Smithsonian itself, as an example of how federal and private sources 

 in the United States combine to support museums, basic research in 

 the sciences or humanities, and the performing arts. Included in this 

 category were M. Michel Pomey of France, Chief of Mission and 

 General Counsel to the Ministry of Cultural Affairs; Dr. Dusan 

 Popovski of Yugoslavia, Member of Parliament and former head of the 

 Secretariat for Education and Culture; Dr. Zaven Hacobian of Iran, 

 Director General of the Cultural Relations Department of the Ministry 

 of Culture and Arts; and Mr. Mapatunage James Perera of Ceylon, 

 Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs. 

 Other visitors were primarily interested in museum administration or 

 museum education; among them were Dr. Abdem Ramon Lancini, 

 Director of the Museum of Natural Sciences of Caracas, Venezuela, 

 who came to study the administration of science museums, and a group 

 of ten Ugandan secondary school and college instructors, who conferred 

 with Smithsonian staff members on the role of museums in supple- 

 mentary primary education. 



INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE OF EXHIBITS 



During much of the period under review, Director William W. 

 Warner and David W. Scott, Director of the National Collection of 

 Fine Arts, held meetings with representatives of the United States 

 Information Agency concerning increased Smithsonian responsibility 

 in presenting exhibits of American art abroad. In the view of USIA 

 officials, a true exchange program in the fine arts— that is, both the 

 sending of American exhibits abroad and the circulation of exhibits of 

 foreign provenance within the United States — might best be admin- 

 istered by a single institution internationally recognized in the field. 

 Since USIA was prevented by statute from the domestic circulation of 




26 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



foreign exhibits, while the Smithsonian had long been engaged in 

 presenting foreign art to American museums through its Traveling 

 Exhibition Service, the Institution seemed to US I A the logical organi- 

 zational home for a two-way exchange program in the fine arts. 



Accordingly, in November 1965, an agreement was signed in which 

 the Smithsonian took on responsibility for presenting American art 

 exhibits abroad, including American representation at the Venice and 

 Sao Paulo Biennials. The agreement encompassed only the fine and 

 decorative arts, with USIA retaining responsibility for all other kinds 

 of exhibits. USIA agreed to provide guidance on international 

 cultural relations factors and a system for communicating requests 

 for exhibits from foreign museums or galleries, through the good 

 offices of Cultural Affairs Officers at U.S. diplomatic posts abroad. 

 The Agency also agreed that its overseas posts would assist in schedul- 

 ing and publicizing all exhibits sent abroad by the Smithsonian. 



The first major exhibit undertaken by the Smithsonian following 

 the transfer of responsibility was the United States entry at the thirty- 

 third Venice Biennale, which opened in the American Pavilion in 

 Venice on the 18th of June. An account of this and other exhibits 

 under the new exchange program is found in the report of the National 

 Collection of Fine Arts (p. 281). 



In conjunction with the Traveling Exhibition Service and the NCFA, 

 the Office also assisted in making arrangements for the Washington 

 showings of various exhibits of international significance. These 

 included Embroideries by Children of Chijnaya, an exhibit of embroideries 

 made by Indian children of the Puno highlands of Peru and assembled 

 by Peace Corps Volunteers, which opened at the State Department 

 and subsequently toured 23 American museums with wide critical 

 acclaim, including feature articles in the New York Times Magazine 

 and Woman's Day; The World of Peru, a photographic panel exhibit 

 depicting Peru's archeology, architecture, folk arts, natural history 

 and industry, which opened at the Museum of Natural History; and 

 The Preservation of Abu Simbel, a photographic and 3-dimensional 

 exhibit prepared by the University of Pennsylvania and the National 

 Geographic Society designed to create interest in the campaign of the 

 American Committee to Preserve Abu Simbel, which also opened at the 

 Museum of Natural History and was later enthusiastically received by 

 some 18 museums across the nation. 



In addition, the Office assisted with the scheduling of Art Treasures 

 of Turkey by providing a tour for three Turkish museum curators who 

 visited the ten major cities where the exhibit was subsequently shown, 

 in order to make advance arrangements and advance planning of 

 installations. 




OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL ACTITIVIES 27 



THE SMITHSON BICENTENNIAL 



The Office Director served as Chairman of the Committee on Foreign 

 Invitations, which had the responsibility of determining the foreign 

 invitation list for the Bicentennial. Since the Washington expenses of 

 all foreign guests were provided for by the Institution, there were 

 obvious budgetary limits to the numbers invited. The formula 

 eventually adopted was to invite directors of prominent museums, 

 zoological parks and botanical gardens from the world over and to 

 invite representatives from such universities, research organizations or 

 other institutions of higher learning as had historical or contemporary 

 ties with the Institution. Similarly, individual foreign scholars or 

 scientists who had carried out research at the Smithsonian or other- 

 wise collaborated with the Institution were also invited. In addition, 

 invitations were sent to all Ministers of Culture or Education in 

 countries with which the United States has diplomatic relations. 



The Office staff assisted the Bicentennial staff in advising foreign 

 guests on appropriate institutions and individuals to contact in their 

 travels within the United States following the Bicentennial celebrations. 



But perhaps the greatest benefit of the Bicentennial, in the view of 

 the Office of International Activities, were the many opportunities to 

 confer with foreign scholars and museum curators concerning future 

 collaboration or the establishment of programs of common interest. 

 Thus, for example, conversations were held with Drs. Mohamed 

 Jacoub and Mohamed Masmoudi, Directors of Tunisian National 

 Museums and the Sfax Ethnographical Museum, respectively, and 

 Dr. Kazimierz Michalowski, Deputy Director of the National Museum 

 in Warsaw, concerning extension of the Foreign Currency Program to 

 Tunisia and Poland. Discussion concerning cooperative museum 

 projects were held with Dr. Karl Katz, Director of the Bezaliel (Na- 

 tional Museum) in Israel, Dr. Ajit Mookerjee, Director of the National 

 Crafts Museum of India, and many others. 



CONFERENCES 

 Early in December the Office of International Activities sponsored 

 a small working-group conference on problems affecting the rich marine 

 resources of the Peruvian coast. In attendance were representatives 

 from the Department of Interior's Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, the 

 Pan American Union, the National Academy of Sciences, the Con- 

 servation Foundation, the Agency for International Development, the 

 State Department, and the Smithsonian itself. The conference was 

 inspired by Secretary Ripley's concern over the alarming decline in 

 the populations of guano-producing sea birds of Peru's coastal islands 




28 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



and the need to stimulate research with an ecological approach to the 

 interdependent factors — birds, fish, man's exploitation, variations in the 

 Humboldt current — which influence Peru's marine environments. 



Various papers emanated from this conference, and in February, 

 George E. Watson, curator of birds, Museum of Natural History, 

 visited Peru to discuss the need for coordination of existing avian, 

 fisheries, and oceanographic research with appropriate Peruvian scien- 

 tists and government officials. Watson found that the Instituto del Mar, 

 Peru's principal oceanographic center, was extremely interested in 

 intensified and more coordinated research, with the help of appropriate 

 American institutions and international organizations. By the end of 

 the year under review, the Smithsonian forwarded a proposal to the 

 Agency for International Development for funding of a small inter- 

 national conference in Peru, the purpose of which would be to determine 

 how to apply modern systems analyses, with the development of mathe- 

 matical models and computer simulation, to the interrelated problems 

 of Peru's marine eco-system. 



The Office also assisted in planning for the Office of Anthropology 

 Conference on Changing Cultures, held at the Smithsonian in April. 

 This conference, which considered preliminary planning for world-wide 

 research on cultures or groups of peoples whose identity will soon be 

 lost through rapid acculturation, was attended by some 36 foreign 

 delegates whose travel was mainly provided for through the Foreign 

 Currency Program. 



In May the Smithsonian played host to the Foreign Service Institute's 

 Senior Seminar on Foreign Policy. A class of 25 senior Foreign Service, 

 U.S. Information Agency, and Department of Defense officers heard 

 Secretary Ripley explain the Institution's general mission, after which 

 various staff members gave briefings on the forthcoming International 

 Biological Program, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and 

 its role in the International Geodetic Bureau, new programs of the 

 division of education and training, and the Special Foreign Currency 

 Program. Following lunch at the Museum of History and Technology, 

 the class was given a conducted tour of two exhibits in preparation, 

 growth of America and the history of medicine, by MHT Director 

 Robert Multhauf. Ambassador G. Lewis Jones, coordinator of the 

 Senior Seminar, called the visit important and useful, since it gave our 

 senior diplomatic representatives abroad greater familiarity with the 

 Institution's overseas commitments, as well as international scientific 

 programs in general. He therefore made plans to have succeeding 

 Seminar classes visit the Smithsonian on a regular basis. 




230-457 




Above: Philistine votive tablet dating from the 11th century, found during 

 the Carnegie Museum-Pittsburgh Theological Seminary excavations at 

 Ashdod, Israel, in July 1965, under the direction of Dr. James L. Swauger. 



Projects supported by grants from the Smithsonian Office of In- 

 ternational Activities, Foreign Currency Program (see pp. 21-24). 



Opposite: Facade of the Rewa Palace (above), a fine example of early 19th 

 century architecture in India, which houses the American Academy of 

 Banares. Symposium (below) on the present-day study needs of South 

 Asian art and archaeology held on April 3, 1966, in the main hall of the 

 American Academy of Benares, Rewa Palace, Varanasi. 



Overleaf: Egyptian laborers at Mendes, a stratified Pharonic site in the Nile 

 Delta, under the direction of Dr. Donald Hansen of the American Research 

 Center in Egypt. 





Under a cooperative program arranged by the Office of International Activ- 

 ities with the Peace Corps (see p. 30) , Volunteers in their spare time collect 

 specimens for the Smithsonian. In Placencia, British Honduras, Volunteer 

 James Grover (above) preserves a rare species of lobster, and (below) 

 unearths insect larvae in the "bush" behind his house. 




OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES 29 



COOPERATIVE PROGRAMS 



In February the Pan American Union awarded the first three grants 

 to Latin American biologists for study at the Smithsonian's Tropical 

 Research Institute (STRI), in the Canal Zone, or the Museum of 

 Natural History under a new joint program with the Smithsonian. 



The initial grants went to Estanislau Kostka Pinto da Silveira, a 

 vertebrate zoologist with the Brazilian Forestry and Conservation 

 Research Center in Rio de Janeiro; to Maximo Alcides Galvez Riveros, 

 associate professor of biology at the National University in Ayacucho, 

 Peru; and to Brother Daniel Gonzalez Padifio, F.S.C., professor of 

 pharmacology at the University of Antioquia in Medellin, Colombia. 

 Professors Pinto da Silveira and Galvez Riveros are conducting field 

 studies on Barro Colorado Island, while Brother Daniel is studying 

 specimens of the economic plants of Colombia at the Museum of 

 Natural History. 



The purpose of this program is to advance basic research in the 

 natural sciences in Latin America by providing the opportunity for 

 systematic biologists to study the Smithsonian's unique collections or, 

 in the case of those primarily interested in environmental biology, the 

 opportunity to carry out field work utilizing the equally unique 

 resources of the Tropical Research Institute. The joint program was 

 evolved by the Office of International Activities and the Pan American 

 Union's Department of Scientific Affairs; it is funded through the 

 Organization of American States' Fellowship Program. Candidates 

 are free to carry out their own research interests or, as the case may be, 

 to serve as research assistants in the on-going projects of the STRI 

 scientists, in order to gain general experience in field investigative 

 methods. It is hoped that this program, now relatively modest in scale, 

 will grow as the opportunities become better known in Latin American 

 universities and the number of qualified candidates increases. 



In the field of UNESCO relations, the Office provided study papers 

 for the Department of State concerning the advantages of United States 

 membership in the International Centre for the Study of the Preser- 

 vation and the Restoration of Cultural Property in Rome, more 

 popularly known as the "Rome Centre," which is an international 

 organization dedicated to the advancement of museum conservation 

 and historical or archeological site preservation, through training 

 programs, consultation and technical publications. The study papers 

 were in part based on a visit to the Rome Centre made by Charles 

 Olin, chief of the Smithsonian's conservation research laboratory. The 

 Office also held preliminary discussions with the Bureau of Educational 

 and Cultural Affairs of the Department of State concerning the 




30 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Smithsonian as a potential site for UNESCO conferences of a scholarly 

 or scientific character. 



Beginning in July of 1965, the Office of International Activities 

 established a cooperative program with the Peace Corps in which Peace 

 Corps Volunteers overseas collect specimens or make field observations 

 in their spare time, according to the specific needs of Smithsonian 

 curators. The Office Director wrote an article in the Volunteer, the 

 monthly magazine sent to Peace Corps Volunteers around the world, 

 explaining the Smithsonian's research objectives and describing the 

 collecting needs of the different departments or divisions. Soon there- 

 after Volunteers began to respond in significant numbers. The 

 department of entomology has received many insect specimens from 

 Africa and corresponded with Volunteers in 22 countries. The depart- 

 ment of mineral sciences and the division of birds have also received 

 significant help, while in the Museum of History and Technology the 

 division of textiles has received photographs and descriptive material 

 on weaving and dyeing processes in Sierra Leone. 



Toward the close of the period under review, the Office Director held 

 preliminary conversations with Mr. Jack Vaughn, Director of the 

 Peace Corps, concerning possible Peace Corps-Smithsonian projects 

 utilizing Volunteers in conservation education, ecological surveys and 

 major archeological excavations. 



OFFICE OF EDUCATION AND TRAINING 



Charles Blitzer, Director 



The programs of the Office of Education and Training fall into 

 two broad categories, reflecting the major activities of the Institution. 

 The first, and larger, category includes those programs directly related 

 to Smithsonian research in science, history, and the arts. The second 

 category includes those programs directly related to the exhibit and 

 public education functions of our museums. In both cases, the 

 programs of the Office are designed to support and strengthen continuing 

 and fundamental Smithsonian activities and, at the same time, to 

 make the results of these activities more widely available to the appro- 

 priate groups. 



The research-related programs of the Office consist primarily of three 

 sorts of visiting research appointments: for post-doctoral scholars 

 and scientists, for graduate students, and for undergraduates. These 

 appointments serve a number of purposes: they make the enormous 

 resources of the Smithsonian, both in collections and in trained pro- 

 fessional staff, available to the scholarly and scientific community; 




OFFICE OF EDUCATION AND TRAINING 31 



they bring these resources to bear directly upon the training of excellent 

 students from our universities; they bring to the Smithsonian scholars 

 and scientists whose researches contribute to the fulfillment of our 

 research mission, and whose presence enlivens the intellectual atmos- 

 phere of the Institution. Evidence of the need met by these appoint- 

 ments is to be found in the numbers of applications received for the 

 current academic year — a total, after preliminary screening, of more 

 than 500 applications for some 80 appointments in all categories. 

 The National Research Council, which administers the Institution's 

 post-doctoral appointments in the sciences, reports that the ratio of 

 applicants to available positions was the highest in its entire experience. 



The names and projects of those appointed for the academic year 

 1965-66, and the summer of 1965 are listed in Appendix 5. 



Cooperative education programs were established between the 

 Smithsonian and nine universities. A total of 17 such programs, 

 aiming primarily at the training of graduate students, now exist. 

 Programs which have been formalized since the publication of the 

 1965 annual report are: 



University of Cincinnati Paleobiology 



Duke University Marine Sciences 



George Washington Invertebrate Zoology 



University 

 Johns Hopkins University Paleontology 



University of Maryland American Studies 



Fine Arts 



Ornithology 

 University of Miami Marine Sciences 



University of Michigan Oriental Art 



University of Washington Oceanography 



Yale University Paleobiology 



The Office of Education and Training sponsored six conferences of 

 interest to Smithsonian staff members and their colleagues in the 

 academic community: 



1 . Seminar on Aviation History (in cooperation with the American 



Aviation Historical Society) 



2. Revision of Smithsonian Institution Meteorological Tables 



3. Flora of North America 



4. Role of Historic Archaeology in the Study of American Culture 



and History 



5. Veterinary Medicine 



6. Political Campaigning in the Nineteenth Century. 




32 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



OFFICE OF PUBLIC INFORMATION 



B. Richard Berg, Director 



To strengthen the Smithsonian's capabilities for keeping the public 

 informed about the expanding programs and activities of the Institution, 

 a Public Information Office was established September 1, 1965. 

 B. Richard Berg was appointed Director, with George J. Berklacy as 

 press officer. William C. Grayson was appointed chief of film and 

 broadcasting on March 15, 1966, and at the close of the fiscal year the 

 audio-visual library also became part of the office, with Mary Ann 

 Friend in charge, and Albert J. Robinson was appointed motion picture 

 and public affairs photographer. 



The Bicentennial of James Smithson's birth in September, focused 

 international attention on the Smithsonian and marked the culmination 

 of a number of projects designed to improve public understanding of 

 the work of the Institution. The early history and present diversity 

 of the Smithsonian was documented by Walter Karp in a colorfully 

 illustrated volume entitled The Smithsonian Institution published by the 

 Institution in association with the editors of American Heritage. The 

 first volume of the Smithsonian Annual brought together the scholarly 

 papers presented during the three-day celebration in a volume entitled 

 Knowledge Among Men (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1966). 



A documentary film on the founding of the Institution was produced 

 by Charles and Ray Eames with a grant from the International 

 Business Machines Corporation, for premier showing at the Bicentennial. 

 This 20- minute historical film, "The Smithsonian Institution," tells 

 the story of James Smithson and his will, the intense debates in Congress 

 over use of the legacy, the founding of the Institution, and decisions by 

 early Secretaries which set the Smithsonian on its present course. 



The National Broadcasting Company arranged a nation-wide telecast 

 of President Johnson's historic speech on "The Noble Adventure" of 

 international education to delegates attending the Bicentennial convo- 

 cation on the Mall, and the Voice of America broadcast the convocation 

 program around the world. 



The celebration served as a focal point for a number of major articles 

 in national magazines both here and abroad. The work of the Smith- 

 sonian was described in Nature (London's weekly journal of science), 

 Punch, Life, Business Week, American Education, Science, National Geographic 

 Magazine, and many other publications. Editorials appeared in news- 

 papers ranging from The New York Times to The Times (London) to the 

 Pasco Times (Texas) to The Wall Street Journal. 



The number of press releases announcing educational programs and 




SMITHSONIAN PRESS 33 



research results more than doubled during the year. However, more 

 information was provided to the public through direct cooperation 

 with reporters, writers, and photographers than was generated through 

 the production of formal news releases. 



More than 78,000 telephone inquiries were handled by the Office's 

 Dial-A-Satellite service, providing recorded messages on satellites and 

 other celestial objects visible in the Washington skies. Prepared by 

 James C. Cornell, Jr., information officer at the Smithsonian Astro- 

 physical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Dial-A-Satellite 

 service is also provided to residents in the Boston metropolitan area, in 

 the New York City area through an arrangement with the Hayden 

 Planetarium of the American Museum of Natural History, and in the 

 Philadelphia area through an arrangement with the Fels Planetarium 

 of the Franklin Institute. 



A Dial-A-Museum service, providing recorded announcements on 

 museum hours and special events open to the public, is being inaugu- 

 rated on August 1, 1966, to provide better assistance to the public by 

 making general information accurately and quickly available and to 

 free the Institution's switchboard for more efficient handling of complex 

 inquiries. 



In broadcasting, the Smithsonian was represented this year in three 

 half- hour programs on 100 stations of the National Educational 

 Television network featuring the creation of exhibits, the Everglades 

 life group, the hall of everyday life in the American past, and the hall 

 of physical anthropology. These were produced by WETA of Wash- 

 ington in cooperation with the Smithsonian. Other programs included 

 a half-hour documentary on the Smithson Bicentennial, on WRC-TV, 

 and a number of radio programs featuring the cultural activities of 

 the Smithsonian. 



Efforts to achieve a full network program on the Smithsonian 

 culminated in 1966 in successful negotiation with NBC for production 

 of the first Smithsonian network television series of 26 programs to 

 start October 15, 1966. 



SMITHSONIAN PRESS 



Anders Richter, Director 



In fulfillment of the founder's prescription for the "diffusion" of 

 knowledge, the Smithsonian has from the days of its establishment 

 placed its weight on the two pillars of publications and exhibits. 

 In his "Advertisement" for Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley, 

 the first volume to appear (1848) in the Smithsonian Contributions to 




34 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Knowledge, Joseph Henry, the Institution's first Secretary, elaborated 

 a most pregnant plan for the publication of scholarly and popular 

 works. The prolific output of over twelve thousand titles in the en- 

 suing 118 years is the natural issue of the first part of Smithson's 

 prescription, for the "increase" of knowledge, for it is a truism that 

 publication is a consequential extension of research. The Smithsonian's 

 publications program partakes of the newly defined emphasis given 

 by the present administration to research and education. The outer 

 manifestation of this, during fiscal 1966, occurred with the creation 

 of the Smithsonian Press and the appointment in May 1966 of a 

 Director to succeed Paul H. Oehser, whose many years of superb 

 service as Chief of the predecessor Editorial and Publications Division 

 and as Public Relations Officer terminated with his retirement in 

 December 1965. The responsibility for public relations was trans- 

 ferred to a separate Office of Public Information. At the close of the 

 fiscal year, the Director of the Press proposed for approval of the 

 Secretary a general reorganization of the publications department. 

 According to this plan, there will be further definition of Press re- 

 sponsibilities through elimination of most non-publishing functions. 

 The Press will continue its strong editorial and design effort in support 

 of the several established series which report the explorations and 

 research of staff and collaborators of the Smithsonian in science, 

 history and art; as well as of more popular publications, such as 

 museum guidebooks and art catalogs. It is expected, however, that 

 the Smithsonian Press imprint will be extended to a greater number 

 of books written as independent works by the staff, by other scholars in 

 the Federal Government, and members of the academic community 

 at large. Inasmuch as the pragmatic definition of publishing is 

 "to make public," it will be necessary to expand the promotion and 

 distribution services of the Press. In keeping with the objectives of the 

 present administration, our purpose is the establishment of a university 

 press of professional and academic excellence. 



Under the imprint of the Smithsonian Press are issued ten active 

 series emanating from the various Museums and Bureaus of the Smith- 

 sonian. This is a rare advantage to Smithsonian staff members and 

 their collaborators, for few universities offer such a captive medium 

 for reports of research. Much more, the Smithsonian serials constitute 

 a public and scholarly service of extraordinary value, for they enable 

 the publication of reports which fall between the journal article and 

 the book — a most neglected species of publication. The present 

 series are. from the Museum of Natural History, the United States 

 National Museum Bulletins, the Proceeding of the United States National 

 Museum, the Contributions from the National Herbarium, and the Smith- 




SMITHSONIAN PRESS 35 



sonian Contributions to Anthropology; from the Museum of History and 

 Technology, the United States National Museum Bulletins and the 

 Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology; from the National 

 Air Museum, the Annals of Flight; from the Smithsonian Astrophysical 

 Observatory, the Contributions to Astrophysics; and from the Freer 

 Gallery of Art, the Freer Gallery of Art Oriental Studies, Occasional Papers 

 of the Freer Gallery of Art, and Ars Orientalis. The National Collection 

 of Fine Arts and the Travelling Exhibition Service sponsor a good 

 many art catalogs, and the Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections is a 

 series with no particular source. The titles of all works issued in these 

 series during fiscal 1966 are included in the list of Smithsonian publi- 

 cations in Appendix 3. 



The Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology series was inauguarted 

 during the year as a medium for material formerly published in the 

 Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletins, which will be discontinued. 

 Another venerable series, the Annual Reports of the Smithsonian Institution, 

 was re-designed and named Smithsonian Tear. The "General Ap- 

 pendix" to the annual report, which formerly contained review essays, 

 was eliminated and in its stead will appear a series of separate Smith- 

 sonian Annuals. The first such annual, Knowledge Among Men, containing 

 the addresses delivered by notable scholars at the bicentennial cele- 

 bration of James Smithson's birth, was published in June 1966 by 

 Simon and Schuster. 



In keeping with its purpose to make available works which describe 

 and interpret its activities and related science to the public at large, 

 the Smithsonian has continued and furthered its cooperative arrange- 

 ments with private publishers. During the past year Simon and 

 Schuster published the Smithsonian Treasury of 20th-century Science. 

 Edited by Webster P. True, this volume is composed of articles reprinted 

 from the "General Appendixes" of recent annual reports. Under 

 terms of another agreement, the firm of American Heritage assisted in 

 the preparation and production of a beautifully illustrated popular 

 history of the Smithsonian, entitled The Smithsonian Institution, which 

 was published upon the bicentennial anniversary of James Smithson's 

 birth. 



During the past fiscal year, 109 publications appeared under the 

 Smithsonian imprint. Of these, sixty-eight were funded by the federal 

 appropriation in the amount of $238,319, thirty-eight were issued 

 through Smithsonian private funds in the amount of $225,661, and 

 three were supported by grants and gifts in the amount of $56,526. 

 Among them are two works which must be considered major publishing 

 events. 



The initial volume of the Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology 




36 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



appeared in January. In it, authors Betty J. Meggers, Clifford Evans 

 and Emilio Estrada have, under the innocuous title of Early Formative 

 Period of Coastal Ecuador, The Valdivia and Machalilla Phases, adduced 

 detailed evidence in support of a radical theory of trans- Pacific Japanese 

 influence upon the early culture of South America. The book quickly 

 received major reviews and promises to be a landmark in New World 

 archeology. In April the Smithsonian Press scored another major 

 event with issuance of the 4-volume Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 

 Star Catalog, compiled by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 

 staff. This work identifies and locates every recorded star in the 

 firmament to the ninth magnitude, more than one-quarter million in 

 all. The work is distinguished further in that its twenty-six hundred 

 pages were produced from computer tapes programmed to project each 

 page on the face of a cathode-ray tube, where it was photographed for 

 offset printing. This basic reference work encompasses information 

 which previously had to be sought in more than fifty separate catalogs. 



The publications distribution section of the Smithsonian Press 

 continued to receive requests for publications from libraries, univer- 

 sities, research institutions, bookstores, and individuals throughout the 

 world. A total of 360,781 publications were distributed (exclusive of 

 those distributed by the Superintendent of Documents of the Govern- 

 ment Printing Office) as opposed to 341,439 in fiscal 1965. Of these, 

 approximately one-hundred thousand were sent to foreign addresses. 

 In addition, 551,642 Smithsonian information leaflets were printed for 

 the use of Smithsonian staff members for use in answering queries. 



The Press continues to administer a Print Shop, a small branch of 

 the Government Printing Office, which exists to serve immediate 

 printing needs — many of which, such as labels for collections, are 

 peculiar to the Smithsonian. The Print Shop, with a staff of two 

 journeymen, completed 849 printing jobs during fiscal 1966. 



By means of its publications has the Smithsonian conserved and 

 communicated the fruits of its scholarship. But, in common with other 

 university presses, the Press may provide less important benefits as well. 

 The presence of an effective publishing program within the Institution 

 plays an immeasurable but certain part in the attraction and retention 

 of research staff. More measurable, though as easily overlooked, is the 

 "public relations" effect of publications by themselves. It has been 

 said that the Smithsonian is known and respected in some of the world's 

 remotest parts by penetration of its books and pamphlets. Each publi- 

 cation distributed under the imprint carries the name of the Smith- 

 sonian in the very best context. 




SMITHSONIAN MUSEUM SERVICE 37 



SMITHSONIAN MUSEUM SERVICE 



Meredith Johnson, Acting Director 



During 1966 the Smithsonian Museum Service continued to expand 

 its facilities for interpreting Smithsonian Museums and their functions 

 to the nearly 19 million visitors who come to the Institution. Special 

 emphasis has been placed upon on-the-spot information, direction, and 

 orientation for visitors through Girl Scout information guides, leaflets, 

 floor plans, and teleshows. 



The staff of the Museum Service carried on its previous program of 

 providing the public with accurate and extensive information on the 

 Smithsonian and other museums in the Washington area through 

 phone calls and letters. They continued to give tours, often in foreign 

 languages, to special guests of the Institution. In this fashion they 

 served as host to The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowden, and 

 the Earl of Snowden, and to His Imperial Highness Prince Mikasa 

 of Japan and his wife and daughter. 



The Junior League of Washington donated its 12th year of service to 

 the elementary schools of the Greater Washington Area. The program 

 of tours was conducted by the Museum Service in cooperation with 

 Mrs. Gilbert M. Grosvenor, Mrs. Joseph Smith, Jr., and Mrs. Ernest 

 N. May, Jr., chairmen of the Junior League Guide Program, and with 

 the curatorial staff of the Smithsonian. More than 32,000 children 

 were taken on 1,137 tours during the school year. The Junior League 

 tour service is a significant contribution to the Institution's educational 

 program. Teachers from the area were invited to come and help the 

 guides and curators develop scripts that would follow closely the cur- 

 riculum of the local school systems. 



The Docent Program provided visitors and scholars with written 

 information on our zoological and anthropological exhibits and research 

 facilities. They assisted in the training of the Junior League Guides, 

 prepared bibliographies in their respective areas, and revised leaflets 

 and brochures for distribution. 



The Free Film Theater continued to provide Wednesday evening 

 films and lectures to the public. Curators often gave introductory 

 talks and participated in question periods after the films. Over 7,000 

 people attended these film showings during the year. Slides and films, 

 made available to schools and other groups all over the country by the 

 Audio- Visual Library, made it possible for those unable to visit the 

 Smithsonian to take advantage of its exhibits and research. Films 

 such as "The Smithsonian's Whale" and "The Leaf Thieves" do a great 

 deal to publicize the activities of its Museums. 




38 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



For the benefit of the children who visit the Smithsonian Museums, 

 a carousel was operated on the Mall, and its activities were accompanied 

 by a steam calliope. Through an increasing number of evening func- 

 tions the Service hopes to involve a greater percentage of the public in 

 our work and to familiarize them on a less formal basis with our 

 exhibits, their preparation and function. 



The special events division of the Museum Service greatly expanded 

 its activities this year because of the tremendously increased number 

 of presentations, receptions, permanent and temporary exhibit hall 

 openings, and concerts. 



The Museum Service provided the invitations, programs, catering, 

 and greeting of guests at all the special events of the Smithsonian. 

 Many of the arrangements for the Bicentennial Celebration of James 

 Smithson's birthday were handled by the Museum Service. This 

 included the provision of bilingual guides and information aides for 

 the many museum personnel who came from abroad to help the 

 Smithsonian celebrate the anniversary of its benefactor. 



The Museum Shops of the Institution provided visitors with books, 

 cards, slides, and reproductions relating to its exhibits. An additional 

 shop was opened in the Smithsonian building this year in order to 

 provide visitors there with attractive and educational remembrances 

 of their visit. Museum Shops are now operating in each of our seven 

 buildings. 



The Society of Associates began its first year under the joint guidance 

 of Mrs. Vernon Knight and Mr. G. Carroll Lindsay, Director of the 

 Museum Service. The tremendous success of its membership drive 

 has been both an exciting experience and a rewarding insight into the 

 interest in our Museums among the general public, not only here 

 in Washington but throughout the country. 



SMITHSONIAN ASSOCIATES 



G. Carroll Lindsay, Acting Executive Secretary 



On September 18, 1965, during the celebration of the two- hundredth 

 anniversary of the birth of James Smithson, the Secretary formally 

 announced the establishment of the Smithsonian Society of Associates.* 



Formal recognition of the support accorded the Smithsonian by its 

 friends across the Nation and, indeed, across the world, has long been 

 a dream of the Institution. Charles D. Walcott, fourth Secretary of 

 the Smithsonian, had considered the formation of a nationwide 

 society of friends of the Smithsonian as part of an endowment cam- 



*The name was later shortened to Smithsonian Associates. 




SMITHSONIAN ASSOCIATES 39 



paign in the 1920s, but the project failed to materialize as a result of 

 Walcott's death in 1927, and the onset of the great depression of the 

 1930s prevented its revival. Membership in the Associates is open 

 to all who care to join with the Smithsonian Institution in furtherance 

 of the Institution's objective, stated by founder James Smithson in 

 his will as "the increase and diffusion of knowledge among men." 



Through their modest annual dues, members express their desire 

 to participate directly in the work of the Smithsonian in the fields 

 of science, art, and history. In response to this concretely expressed 

 interest, the Institution provides the Associates with special educa- 

 tional and cultural benefits, including events that acquaint them 

 with the wide range of Smithsonian activities and its programs in 

 education, scientific and historical research, museum exhibition, 

 and the performing arts. Associates are encouraged to participate 

 in these activities to the fullest possible extent. 



The Smithsonian will continue, as it has for the past 120 years, 

 energetically to serve the scientific and scholarly community of the 

 nation and the world, and make its museums and information resources 

 available to the general public. The Associates, because of their special 

 interest in the Smithsonian, will have the privilege of an especially 

 close relationship with the Institution and the opportunity to share 

 deeply in its programs. 



Since November the Associates in the Washington area have enjoyed 

 a variety of lectures, film showings, programs for children, exhibit 

 openings, and similar opportunities to become more fully acquainted 

 with the varied work of the Smithsonian. One event of great interest 

 was a behind-the-scenes tour of the Smithsonian's exhibit-production 

 activities. Silk screen artists showed how they produce exhibit labels 

 and graphics. Model-makers displayed their intricate wares in cut- 

 away form, showing the delicate mechanisms which go into the pro- 

 duction of a "working" exhibit. A large group of freeze-dry specimens, 

 the freeze-dry process that is rapidly replacing conventional taxidermy 

 methods at the Smithsonian, and a wide variety of other exhibits-making 

 techniques were demonstrated. 



Another event of special interest was a program presented by car- 

 toonist Milton Caniff, who drew for an audience of eager adults and 

 children their favorite characters from "Steve Canyon." Johnny Hart 

 and Brant Parker on another memorable evening delighted young and 

 old with the King, Rodney the Cowardly Knight, the Wizard, the 

 King's horse Bung, and other characters who inhabit the Kingdom 

 of Id. 



In a more serious vein the Associates heard Archaeological Institute 

 of America lecturer Machteld J. Mellink describe the archaeological 




40 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



work at Lycia, and heard Link lecturer George M. Low evaluate the 

 Apollo space program. 



Younger audiences of members' children were captivated by Saturday 

 morning programs that dealt with subjects ranging from a study of 

 minerals to the exploration of outer space, all under the direction of 

 Smithsonian scientists. 



Many members were absorbed by the contemporary art works from 

 the Sao Paulo Bienal, shown for the first time in the United States 

 at the Smithsonian and introduced to Washington at a gala Associates 

 reception also attended by the artists whose works were on view. 



On May 1, 1966, Mrs. Vernon Knight, executive secretary of the 

 Associates, resigned to take up residence in Texas and G. Carroll 

 Lindsay, director of the Smithsonian Museum Service, assumed the 

 position as acting executive secretary. On June 1, Mrs Lisa Suter, 

 formerly membership secretary for the Corcoran Gallery of Art, joined 

 the staff as program director, with responsibility for planning and 

 directing the various programs of lectures, films, children's events, and 

 other educational activities. 



Publications and Addresses 



The following addresses and statements were delivered by the 

 Secretary (the scientific papers of the Secretary are listed on pages 

 137-138): 



Commencement address, Marlboro College, Marlboro, Vermont, 

 June 6, 1965. 



Statement on basic research and the National Science Foundation, 

 presented to the Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Develop- 

 ment of the Committee on Science and Astronautics, U.S. House 

 of Representatives, July 22, 1965. 



"The museum as an enigma." Address before the closing banquet of 

 the Bicentennial Celebration commemorating the birth of James 

 Smithson, Washington, D.C., September 18, 1965. (Published in 

 Knowledge Among Men. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1966.) 



"Museums in today's changing world." Address to the International 

 Council of Museums, New York City, September 27, 1965. 



Address to the Council of Fellows of the American Anthropological 

 Association, Denver, Colorado, November 20, 1965. 



Opening remarks to the International Union for the Conservation of 

 Nature and Natural Resources, Bangkok, Thailand, November 29, 

 1965. 




ADDRESSES BY SECRETARY 41 



Statement on a center for advanced study in Washington, presented to 

 the Woodrow Wilson Memorial Commission, Washington, D.C., 

 March 10, 1966. 



"A perspective of the Smithsonian program in ecology." Address to 

 the National Parks Association, Washington, D.C., March 15, 1966. 



"Three challenges to biology." Address to the Sigma Xi Initiation 

 Banquet, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, 

 April 21, 1966. 



"The future of environmental improvement." Address to the Environ- 

 mental Improvement Lecture Series, The Graduate School of the 

 U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., May 31, 1966. 



"Status of learning." Commencement address, The George Wash- 

 ington University, Washington, D.C., June 5, 1966. 



Publications and speeches by members of the Secretary's staff 

 included the following: 



G. Carroll Lindsay. George Brown Goode. Pp. 127-140 in Keepers 

 of the Past, edit, by Clifford Lord. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University 

 of North Carolina Press, 1965. 



Ritterbush, P. C. Outside professional activities by federal laboratory 

 personnel. In The Environment of the Federal Laboratory, Third 

 Symposium of the Federal Council for Science and Technology 

 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965), pp. 98-102. 



. Research training in governmental laboratories in the United 



States. Minerva (Winter 1966), vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 186-201. 



. "Science and technology in support of civilian power." 



Address, The Air War College, Maxwell A.F.B., Alabama, April 21, 

 1966. 



Among the many newspaper and magazine articles about the 

 Smithsonian appearing during the year, those listed below were of 

 particular interest: 



Burkett, Warren. Science chases dust from "Nation's Attic" — The 

 Smithsonian. Business Week, May 21, 1966, pp. 110-113. 



Carmichael, Leonard. James Smithson: Pathfinder in Science and 

 Philanthropy. Nature (London: October 23, 1965), vol. 208, no. 

 5008, pp. 320-321. 



The many splendored Smithsonian. Carnegie Magazine (September 

 1965), pp. 239-244. 



Cowan, R. S.; Davis, D.; Humphrey, P. S.; Klein, W. H.; Ritter- 

 bush, P. C; and Shetler, S. Smithsonian Institution Conference 

 on Environmental Biology. Bioscience, vol. 15, 1965, pp. 607-608. 



Curry-Lindahl, Kai. Museijubileum i Washington. Svenska Dag- 

 bladet, October 19, 1965, p. 1. 



230-457—66 5 




42 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Downie, Leonard, Jr. The National Air Museum. The Washington 



Post; Potomac [Magazine], September 5, 1965, pp. 10-11. 

 Esterow, Milton. Man in the news: Smithsonian's birdman. The 



New York Times, May 30, 1966. p. 1. 

 Glueck, Grace. Smithsonian widens art vistas— cluster of museums 



emerging as great national center. The New York Times, May 30, 



1966, pp. 1, 8. 

 Herron, Paul. A legacy of learning. The Washington Post: [Maga- 

 zine] Potomac, September 5, 1965, p. 2. 

 Martin, David. The Smithsonian, wellspring of a Nation's pride. 



Life (November 19, 1965), vol. 59, no. 21, pp. 86-102. 

 Morales, Herbert. Diffusing knowledge among men. American 



Education (September 1965), vol. 1, no. 6. 

 The Smithsonian Institution. NEA Journal (September 1965), vol. 54, 



no. 6, pp. 30-32. 

 Ripley, Josephine. The Smithsonian looks ahead. The Christian 



Science Monitor, August 14, 1965, p. 1. 

 Sghaden, Herman. The Smithsonian, old and new. The Washington 



Star: Sunday Magazine, September 12, 1965, pp. 4-25. 

 Simons, Howard. A thoughtful party. New Scientist (London: Sep- 

 tember 30, 1965), p. 831. 

 Tassler, Alan, and Payne, William A. Museum of History and 



Technology. The Washington Post: Potomac, September 5, 1965, 



pp. 18-23. 

 Toulmin, Stephen. Dusting off the attic. Punch, October 27, 1965, 



pp. 605-607. 

 White, O. M. Smithsonian: storehouse of science and culture. 



National Geographic School Bulletin, vol. 44, no. 3. September 27, 



1966, pp. 42-44. 

 Witherspoon, Thomas C. Resource for understanding in the Nation's 



Capital. The George Washington University Magazine (Spring 1966), 



vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 20-21. 

 Wolff, Geoffrey A. The Smithsonian Institution. The Washington 



Post: Potomac, September 5, 1965, pp. 5-8. 

 Wyant, William K., Jr. Preserving the past for the future. Coronet, 



July 1966, pp. 138-143. 

 Yenckel, James. The Natural History Museum. The Washington 



Post: Potomac, September 5, 1965, pp. 14-17. 




United States National Museum 



Frank A. Taylor, Director 



tn the Great Hall of the Smithsonian Institution, on the evening of 

 ■*■ May 17, 1966, Secretary Ripley installed Dr. Richard S. Cowan 

 and Dr. Robert P. Multhauf as directors of the Museum of Natural 

 History and the Museum of History and Technology, respectively. 

 The installation ceremony was attended by members of the Board of 

 Regents and Smithsonian colleagues of the Directors and their families. 



Dr. Cowan, botanist, came to the Smithsonian Institution in 1957 

 as associate curator of botany and served from 1962 as assistant and 

 later as deputy director of the Museum of Natural History. He was 

 appointed Director in December 1965. Dr. Multhauf, historian of 

 science, joined the Smithsonian staff in April 1 954 as curator of engi- 

 neering and has served as chairman of the department of science and 

 technology of the Museum of History and Technology since June 1957. 

 He was appointed Director on April 4, 1966. 



The Act of 1846 establishing the Smithsonian Institution provided 

 for a museum, and the name "United States National Museum" came 

 into use in the 1850s. In 1884 appropriations to the Smithsonian for 

 the U.S. National Museum were authorized and an annual report to 

 the Congress by its Director was required. Today, its component mu- 

 seums are institutions of individual and world-wide reputation. The 

 reports on the Museums of Natural History and History and Tech- 

 nology are therefore treated separately, in accordance with the re- 

 porting procedures established in the Smithsonian Tear 1965, and are to 

 be found on pages 63 and 221. 



43 




44 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 U.S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



On September 10, 1965, the Senate passed the National Museum 

 Act of 1965 and forwarded it to the House of Representatives. On 

 June 2, 1966, the Committee on House Administration reported 

 favorably on the House version of the bill, with recommendations that 

 it pass. The prospect for passage was favorable.* 



The preamble of the Act states that the museums of the Nation 

 constitute cultural and educational institutions of great importance 

 to its progress, and that national recognition is necessary to insure 

 that museum resources for preserving and interpreting the Nation's 

 heritage may be more fully utilized in the enrichment of public life 

 in the community. 



Implicit in the Act is recognition of the Smithsonian's traditional 

 role of making available to all museums the results of its research into 

 museum practices and techniques and the development of innovations 

 in such areas as the exhibition and preservation of museum objects, 

 cataloging of collections, and Museum administration. Also implied 

 is the assistance given others by advice, by training of personnel, and 

 by the review and evaluation of museum programs, building plans, and 

 projects. The Act specifies that the Director of the United States 

 National Museum shall cooperate with museums and their professional 

 organizations in continuing study of museum problems and opportuni- 

 ties, both in the United States and abroad, and that he shall prepare 

 and carry out programs for training, publication, research, and the 

 development of museum techniques. 



Pending the appropriation of funds to implement the National 

 Museum Act, plans have been made for a modest start of new pro- 

 grams in fiscal year 1 967. The need most frequently voiced by museum 

 officers is for trained museum personnel. A series of seminars on 

 museum functions will start with a meeting on museum education, to 

 be held in late summer 1966. Arranged by the Smithsonian Office of 

 Education and Training, this first seminar is being supported by the 

 Office of Education, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 

 Guidance obtained from these meetings will be followed in developing 

 cooperative programs under the Act. 



During the year, the Smithsonian cooperated with the American 

 Association of Museums and the Department of Health, Education, 

 and Welfare in compiling and testing a questionnaire on the basic data 

 of museums and their educational programs. The returns from this 

 will bring up to date information about the museum field and will be 

 the start of a machine-record information tool to be compiled and 



*The bill was passed and was signed by President Lyndon B. Johnson on October 

 15, 1966. 




OFFICE OF THE REGISTRAR 45 



administered by the American Association of Museums with the 

 assistance of Smithsonian computer facilities. 



The Director, United States National Museum, at the invitation of 

 Dr. Roland Force, Director of the Bernice P. Bishop Museum, 

 Honolulu, Hawaii, acted as one of several consultants advising on 

 proposals to expand the scope of that museum in fields of archives, 

 Hawaiian history, and the history of technology and industry in the 

 State. 



The Director, with others, discussed with Dr. Grover Murray, 

 incoming President of Texas Technological College, the development 

 of the University Museum as a teaching aid and as a source of educa- 

 tional exhibits for developing countries, as part of Dr. Murray's plans 

 for an international center for research in the utilization of arid and 

 semi-arid lands. 



As president of the International Committee for Museums of Science 

 and Technology of the International Council of Museums, the Director 

 assisted in planning for the Washington meetings of ICOM '65 and 

 conducted the programs of the International Committee in Wash- 

 ington, Philadelphia, and New York. 



The ICOM General Conference adopted a resolution calling upon 

 governments owning blocked currencies in developing countries to 

 employ these funds in aid of museums and their organizations. The 

 Director assisted the Smithsonian Office of International Activities in 

 drafting tentative programs for aid to museums in these excess currency 

 countries. Joseph A. Patterson, Director of the American Association 

 of Museums, made a preliminary survey of museum opportunities in 

 Asia, under the proposed program. 



The National Museum arranged a day at the Smithsonian for the 

 foreign museum professionals on the annual State Department-Ameri- 

 can Association of Museums tour of United States museums. Direc- 

 tors of the museums of the Smithsonian entertained the visitors at 

 luncheon and with tours of their museums. 



The Director spoke at the celebration of the 25th anniversary of the 

 Nashville Children's Museum. He was elected a member of the 

 Council of the American Association of Museums. 



OFFICE OF THE REGISTRAR 



A primary function of the Office of the Registrar is the accessioning 

 of new material. As Registrar for both the Museum of Natural History 

 and the Museum of History and Technology, this office recorded the 

 accessions for 1,412,279 specimens, of which 1,281,062 were natural 




46 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 U.S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



history materials. (Statistics on the present totals of the collections 

 and the distribution of specimens in these two museums are given on 

 pages 122 and 242.) Another function of the office is handling mail for 

 both Museums. Its increased activity is reflected in the volume of mail 

 flowing through the mail room, which this year rose to 3,553 pieces 

 daily, as compared to 2,639 three years ago. 



Often overlooked as an educational aspect of the Smithsonian is still 

 another service performed through this office — processing replies to 

 daily requests for information on every conceivable subject. These 

 inquiries come from the housewife, the farmer, the retired military 

 man, the young man in the military service, the teacher, the business- 

 man, and always, the school child. This year the queries totaled 

 approximately 13,000, and who knows how many careers have been 

 started or helped by the thoughtful, authoritative replies, many re- 

 quiring for their preparation considerable time and research, which 

 this office sought from the Smithsonian's professional staff and for- 

 warded to the enquirer. 



Freight and express shipments processed by the office numbered 

 5800 and totaled 581 tons. The equipment sent for use of Museum 

 staff members engaged in explorations consisted not only of collecting 

 and camping gear, diving equipment, and scientific instruments, but 

 also of several pickup trucks and two boats that were shipped to foreign 

 ports. Collecting equipment was likewise shipped to members of the 

 Peace Corps, as well as to other Americans stationed in foreign coun- 

 tries, who have offered to collect specimens distinctive to the particular 

 areas of their official activities. 



Among the incoming foreign shipments cleared through the U.S. 

 Customs in 1966 were items ranging from every variety of natural 

 history specimen to a portable proton magnetometer (for use in under- 

 water exploration). Four cases of rare Diirer drawings from Berlin and 

 13 tons of art treasures carried by air freight from Turkey, together 

 valued at more than six million dollars, were entered for the Traveling 

 Exhibition Service. 



Official assignments for foreign travel accounted for more than three 

 hundred individual passport transactions requiring visas to worldwide 

 areas. Collecting permits and clearances were obtained from many 

 countries for remote localities where field work was undertaken in 

 behalf of the Smithsonian. 



To keep abreast of the rapid growth within the Smithsonian, a 

 review is being made of procedures to simplify and improve registra- 

 tion methods, including the possibility of automating some phases 

 of the work. 




OFFICE OF EXHIBITS 47 



REGISTRARS OFFICE— SUMMARY OF ACTIVITIES 

 Fiscal Year ended June 30, 1966 



Accessions (specimens) 



Museum of Natural History 1,281,062 



Museum of History and Technology 131,217 



Mail (pieces) 895, 356 



Transportation — shipments arranged 5, 800 



(16,680 pieces, 581 tons) 



Letters of inquiry processed 13, 000 



Foreign travel requests processed 



Passports obtained 300 



Visas obtained 600 



OFFICE OF EXHIBITS 



Under the direction of chief of exhibits John E. Anglim and assistant 

 chief Benjamin W. Lawless, the office of exhibits made its contribution 

 to the Smithsonian's public education, information, and inspirational 

 objectives. By means of imaginative design, effective arrangement 

 of specimens, and readable labels, the office of exhibits gave signifi- 

 cant support to the effort of museum scientists and historians to 

 make readily understandable to the general viewer, complex and 

 often little-understood historical, cultural, scientific, and technological 

 concepts, and to awaken an interest in the fields of knowledge they 

 represent. 



Research in new approaches to exhibit design was continued with 

 the development of a learning-aid for elementary school children on 

 the subject of the physics of light. The first unit was installed for 

 testing in a Fairfax County, Virginia, school near the close of the school 

 year. Progress made on the individual experiments assure that 16 

 will be ready for rotation to 3 schools during the 1966-1967 school year. 



As part of a planning project to investigate principles of exhibits for 

 the blind, a comparison was made between the effectiveness of an 

 exhibit made especially for the blind and one made for the sighted but 

 explained to the blind with the aid of touch objects passed around by 

 a guide lecturer. Other experiments will be made under a grant 

 from the Vocational Rehabilitation Administration of the Department 

 of Health, Education, and Welfare. 



History and Technology Exhibits Laboratory 



The Museum of History and Technology exhibits laboratory com- 

 pleted the architectural restoration of the great hall in the Smithsonian 




48 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 U.S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



building in time for the Bicentennial Celebration of James Smithson's 

 birth. This work included research on furniture and furnishings, 

 color schemes, all appropriate to the architecture of the 1 840s, and the 

 design of cases to display exhibits in the many disciplines of history, 

 art, science, and technology embraced by the Smithsonian, Riddick 

 Vann was the exhibits designer and coordinator for this project and 

 was assisted in case installation by production teams under the super- 

 vision of Walter N. Lewis. 



In November, exhibits were completed by production teams under 

 the supervision of Frank A. Gambino in a major portion of the Armed 

 Forces history section of the museum, including chronological exhibits 

 through the Civil War; the ordnance hall; the Continental gondola 

 Philadelphia; and the hall of orders, medals, and decorations. The 

 chronological exhibits tell by means of historic specimens, documents, 

 and finely detailed ship models the military history of America from 

 the earliest explorations through the final battles of the Civil War. 

 Such notable relics as General George Washington's campaign tent 

 and General Philip H. Sheridan's horse mounted in a lifelike stance 

 associate the visitor with the actual objects of history. Design of the 

 hall layout as well as many of the individual exhibition units was by 

 John W. Brown. Layout and design of the second part of the chrono- 

 logical series, from the Civil War to the present, is being undertaken 

 by John R. Clendening. 



The ordnance hall shows military and naval arms dating from 

 Colonial times to the Korean War, generally arranged by chronology 

 and type. Hall designer Brown, assisted by Nadya Kayaloff and 

 John Clendening, show graphically the development of military weap- 

 ons from the wheel-lock musket of the 16th century to the modern 

 repeating rifle. 



The oldest American man-of-war still in existence, the gunboat 

 Philadelphia, was installed adjacent to the ordnance hall under the 

 design supervision of Mr. Brown. Adjacent exhibits cases and panels 

 document the strategically important battle of Valcour Island and the 

 part played in that battle by the crew of the Philadelphia. 



In the exhibition of orders, medals, and decorations of all countries, 

 which progresses from the earliest orders of knighthood to the medals 

 and decorations of our present century, designer Deborah Bretzfelder 

 made use of the rich decorative content of the exhibit specimens to 

 create an exhibition area of unusual visual interest. 



In March 1966, the hall of physical sciences was opened to the public. 

 Covering the development of the physical sciences from ancient times 

 to the present, the hall features a full-scale replica of the observatory of 

 Ptolemy; a documented display of astronomical devices dating back 




OFFICE OF EXHIBITS 49 



to medieval times; a reproduction of the shop front of Benjamin Pike, 

 complete with optical instruments built by this remarkable 19th- 

 century American; a collection of early teaching instruments from 

 major American colleges and universities; a life-group showing Andrew 

 Ellicott and Benjamin Banneker surveying the northwest boundary 

 of the District of Columbia; and actual portions of the Mark I and 

 Eniac computers. Other specimens in this hall include a special ex- 

 hibition of ruling and dividing engines, a special exhibit on the nature 

 and theory of light, and a reconstruction of the interior of Henry Fitz's 

 telescopemaking shop of the late 19th century. The exhibits designer 

 was James J. Shelton, assisted by Miss Kayaloff and Mr. Clendening 

 and installation of the hall was by production teams led by Harry 

 H. Harris and Walter N. Lewis. 



The hall of ceramics opened to the public in April 1966. In it 

 designer Barbara Bowes utilized a variety of room sizes and decorative 

 motifs to complement and enhance a variety of ceramic objects ranging 

 from sophisticated examples of European porcelain and delftware to 

 the beginnings of American ceramics of the 17th and 18th centuries. 

 Of particular note are the Robert McCauley collection of Liverpool 

 jugs, the Hans Syz collection of porcelain, and the Ellouise Baker 

 Larson collection of English earthenware and Staffordshire ware for 

 the American market. The hall was installed by production teams 

 under the supervision of Carl A. Alexander. 



The last two permanent exhibit halls opened during this fiscal year 

 were the hall of medicine and dentistry and the hall of pharmacy. 

 In these, a series of cases and period rooms portray in chronological 

 order the development of the healing arts from Greek and Roman 

 times to the present. The halls were designed by Mr. Clendening and 

 the exhibits were installed by production teams led by Mr. Lewis. 



Special and temporary exhibits numbered 42, a great increase over 

 previous years, and they demonstrated in 3-dimensional form the vast 

 scope of the Smithsonian collections and the increasing scholarly 

 interest in bringing the results of current research work on these 

 collections before the general public. They ranged from American 

 folk art to the life and times of Jawaharlal Nehru and from German 

 glass to Atlas computers. 



Throughout the year, units of the MHT exhibits laboratory con- 

 tinued their work of modelmaking, restoration, plastics, preparation, 

 and cabinetmaking for various exhibits halls and special exhibitions. 

 For the curatorial staff Robert L. Klinger and his group continued 

 to prepare and restore exhibits specimens and to construct detailed 

 museum models and animated devices such as a working model of the 

 locomotive Stourbridge Lion recently completed for the hall of trans- 




50 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 U.S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



portation. Richard W. Marshall worked on large-scale schematic 

 models of piano, harpsichord, and clavichord key actions for display 

 in the hall of musical instruments and completed a finely detailed 

 model of an early mine pump for the hall of civil engineering. Donald 

 Hoist prepared mannequins and reconstructed uniforms for the hall 

 of Armed Forces History. John W. Schulz and Benjamin Snouffer 

 prepared models and restored specimens for exhibit halls completed 

 and in progress, including a schematic model of the Jacquard loom for 

 the textile hall and a Dutch scoop-wheel turbine model for the hall 

 of civil engineering. The restoration section under G. Gordon Dentry 

 and Donald L. Fredette prepared furniture, ceramics, and glass for 

 use in period rooms and case settings. 



In addition to its regular duties, the office of exhibits lent support 

 throughout the year to various museums of the Smithsonian complex, 

 as well as offering consultation in a number of exhibits disciplines to 

 various museums throughout the United States and abroad. Here, 

 too, special mention should be made of the considerable number of 

 foreign museum experts who came to the Smithsonian to study our 

 exhibits techniques. 



Also during this fiscal year, the exhibits editor's office, which formerly 

 reported to the Director, was transferred to the office of exhibits. 

 Under the direction of chief exhibits editor George Weiner, assisted 

 by Mrs. Constance R. Minkin, the office is responsible for writing or 

 rewriting, editing, coordination, and printing liaison of all exhibits 

 labels for the U.S. National Museum and, as the need arises, elsewhere 

 in the Smithsonian Institution. During this year, Mr. Weiner and 

 his staff, which includes Mis. Edna W. Wright and Nicholas Rona, 

 produced 8165 labels for 78 permanent and special exhibits of museums 

 and offices of the Smithsonian Institution. 



Natural History Laboratory 



Under the direction of chief of exhibits John E. Anglim, assisted by 

 A. Gilbert Wright, the Museum of Natural History exhibits laboratory 

 completed 115 cases and panels for seven permanent exhibits halls, as 

 well as producing a dozen special and temporary exhibitions and 

 rendering substantial assistance to the exhibits programs of the National 

 Collection of Fine Arts and the Smithsonian Institution Traveling 

 Exhibition Service. 



The new hall of gems, designed by Mrs. Dorothy Guthrie, was 

 opened in September 1965 during the Bicentennial Celebration, and 

 the new jade room, also designed by Mrs. Guthrie, was opened in 




OFFICE OF EXHIBITS 51 



December. Also opened during the year were extensions of the 

 cultures of Africa and Asia hall, designed by Lucius E. Lomax; the 

 hall of osteology, designed by Morris Pearson; the hall of physical 

 anthropology, designed by Joseph Shannon; and the life in the sea hall, 

 also designed by Mr. Shannon. In June the reptile and amphibian 

 section of the hall of cold-blooded vertebrates, designed by James 

 Speight, was opened. 



Preparation and installation of the exhibits were performed by the 

 production section under the supervision of production chief Julius 

 Tretick, aided by assistant production chief Charles W. Mickens, 

 fabrication supervisor Frank A. Nelms, and graphics supervisor 

 Keith M. Metzler. Labels for the exhibits were edited and coordinated 

 by the exhibits editor and his staff. 



During the year, the illustration section, under Christopher H. 

 Reinecke, produced nearly 200 drawings, paintings, charts, and other 

 illustrations for use in exhibits. The models, dioramas, and accessories 

 section, headed by John Babyak, produced diorama figurines and 

 life-size figures for life groups, foreground accessories, replicas of 

 marine invertebrates, and other models. The plastics section, under 

 John C. Widener, continued research into new plastics molding and 

 casting techniques and produced a large variety of small and large 

 plastic casts faithful in surface detail to the originals. Among the more 

 notable were a Semitic storm god for the hall of Old World archeology; 

 a basking shark for the life in the sea hall; life-size mannequins for the 

 MHT First Ladies hall; and such diversified objects as lava formations, 

 meteorites, and Corinthian capitals. The freeze-dry microbiology 

 laboratory, under Rolland O. Hower, continued its work in perfecting 

 this Smithsonian-developed preservation process, which has virtually 

 supplanted the more tedious taxidermy procedures in the preparation 

 of small animals for exhibition purposes. The new section of lighting 

 and audio-visual techniques, headed by Carroll B. Lusk, devised new 

 methods for illuminating diamonds, sapphires, and other precious 

 stones; and Mr. Lusk, assisted by James C. Nyce, engineered an exceed- 

 ingly popular audio-visual exhibition of African musical instruments 

 for the cultures of Africa and Asia hall and conducted extensive research 

 into visitor-operated random-access slide projectors to be used in both 

 the Museums of Natural History and the Museum of History and 

 Technology. 



In April, both Museums jointly developed a behind-the-scenes tour 

 for the Smithsonian Society of Associates. Conducted in the Museum 

 of Natural History, this tour showed the scope and variety of activities 

 of the office of exhibits of the United States National Museum and 

 demonstrated its techniques for bringing to the general public, for its 




52 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 U.S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



education and enlightenment, representative portions of our collections 

 and the results of Smithsonian research. 

 During the year, 12 special exhibits were produced or installed. 



CONSERVATION-ANALYTICAL LABORATORY 



The conservation-analytical laboratory in 1966 placed its major 

 emphasis on the development of a facility to produce rapid analyses 

 for identification of materials. This is the result of a need for this 

 facility in relation to the accessioning of objects, the determination 

 of authenticity, and the importance of the identification of material 

 used in conservation treatment. 



The laboratory is designed and equipped to undertake research in 

 conservation which involves the materials, the environment, and the 

 technology of the object and to cooperate in this research with other 

 bureaus of the Smithsonian Institution and other museums and labora- 

 tories in the United States, Europe, and Asia. 



One major analytical program which the laboratory undertook in 

 cooperation with curator Gus Van Beek of the Smithsonian Office of 

 Anthropology and Rutherford J. Gettens of the Freer Gallery of Art 

 was the quantitative analysis of bronze objects using X-ray fluorescence 

 analysis. 



Analysis of pigments was undertaken by the laboratory to authen- 

 ticate works of art, and to recognize the unoriginal parts of an object. 

 Analytical techniques used for analysis of pigment samples included 

 microscopic examination, chemical microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and 

 infrared spectrophotometry. The latter two instrumental techniques 

 require only 50 micrograms of sample for analysis and quickly provide 

 information on the presence of impurity phases, minor constituents, 

 variations in composition, extenders, and crystal structure, all of which 

 are evidence of artificial or natural origins of mineral pigments and 

 of methods of manufacture. 



During the past few years, extended -range high-resolution infrared 

 instrumentation has become commercially available and has led to 

 a wealth of new information for practicing industrial spectroscopists, 

 especially those dealing with inorganic pigments and extenders. How- 

 ever, a survey of the literature indicates that few spectra have been 

 published for inorganic pigments encountered in the analysis of fine 

 paintings. 



In the course of the preparation of a series of high-resolution infrared 

 spectra and X-ray diffraction patterns on standard known samples of 

 inorganic pigments for use in the identification and study of oil paint- 

 ings, it became apparent that differences in the method of manufacture 




Office of Exhibits: Sculptor 

 John Weaver completing 

 clay figure of Congo Chief 

 for hall of Asian and 

 African cultures. 



Exhibits specialist Rolland 

 Hower checking data in 

 freeze dry laboratory. 



,1 



> v.\\\ 1 1 






Office of Exhibits: Accessories specialist Juan de Pau working on leaf specimens 

 for the hall of botany. 



Installation of hall of ceramics — final stages, with Joseph Faletta working on 

 an exhibit as John Brown and William Haase check plans. 




r- 



! XI ,. 



^ -/J!" 



Conservation Research Labora- 

 tory. Painting in the Naval 

 History collections is restored 

 and rebacked: Top, Raking 

 light shows tears before treat- 

 ment. Center, detail of ship at 

 left after tears filled and painting 

 lined. Bottom, treatment com- 

 pleated. 







,- 




ml 



Traveling Exhibition Service's "Rugs from the McMullen Collection" dis- 

 played at the Munson-Williams-Proctor Institute, Utica, New York. Travel- 

 ing Exhibition Service's "Early Chicago Architecture" at the Chicago 

 Civic Center. 




TRAVELING EXHIBITION SERVICE 53 



of recent pigments could be observed in the laboratory results. This 

 suggested further work in two areas : clarification of the relationships 

 between method of manufacture and X-ray diffraction and infrared 

 results on the known samples and methods of distinguishing pigment 

 samples from oil paintings on the basis of manufacture. Variations in 

 the elemental composition also occur and can be detected by micro- 

 techniques of X-ray fluorescence analysis. 



The detailed study of coinage, its composition, and the method by 

 which it was manufactured, is a fertile field for the study of the history 

 of metallurgy. A program of this nature was begun with curator 

 Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli of the division of numismatics. The primary 

 emphasis in this work is on the totally nondestructive techniques. 



The methods of analysis which have been used to date are: X-ray 

 emission spectrography, X-ray diffraction and optical microscopy. 

 X-ray emission spectrography gives us the major alloy composition of 

 a very thin layer of metal on the surface of the coin. X-ray diffraction 

 provides information on the crystal structure and physical state of the 

 crystalline lattice of the surface layer. Optical microscopy is used to 

 examine the surface characteristics of the coin. 



Planned future methods of analysis include neutron activation analy- 

 sis, laser probe optical emission spectrography, X-ray radiography, 

 and possibly ultrasonic and eddy current testing. Neutron activation 

 analysis will allow us to make a more realistic estimate of the average 

 composition of the coins under study because it does not restrict itself 

 to the surface of the object. Laser probe optical emission spectrography 

 is being considered because of the increased sensitivity to trace elements. 

 One objection to laser excitation is a small mark which results on the 

 coin; and the method does remove micro quantities of material. 

 Laser probe emission spectrography does, however, present the possi- 

 bility of comparing the source of raw material through correlation of 

 trace element patterns. X-ray radiography will be used to reveal 

 details of the gross internal structure while ultrasonic and eddy current 

 methods will be used to obtain information about the internal structure 

 on the micro scale. 



TRAVELING EXHIBITION SERVICE 



The Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service is self- 

 supporting, deriving its income mainly from the rental fees charged 

 for its exhibitions. 



It currently circulates throughout the United States and Canada 

 about 100 shows, as listed below. 



230-457 — 66 6 




54 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 U.S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



The larger, important exhibitions of 1 966 included Diirer and His Time, 

 from Berlin, Pre-Columbian Gold from Peru, Rugs From the McMullan 

 Collection, from Mr. Joseph McMullan, and Art Treasures of Turkey, 

 from Ankara and Istanbul. An extension of the loan of 7,000 Tears of 

 Iranian Art permitted this exhibition to be shown at the Allentown Art 

 Museum, an action given favorable notice in an article "Big Show, 

 Small Museum" that appeared in Arts Magazine (December 1965). 

 Catalogs were published for the Diirer, Latin American, McMullan 

 and Turkish exhibitions, and a leaflet on Irish architecture and monu- 

 ments. John Canaday wrote in The New York Times that the catalog 

 Diirer and His Times, which was reprinted three times, is "a must for 

 every art library." 



In accordance with the Smithsonian's widening educational interests, 

 a pilot program to bring art to the District of Columbia schools was 

 instituted. Works supplied by the National Collection of Fine Arts 

 were prepared, transported, and installed at the Taft Junior High 

 School and the Woodrow Wilson High School. On the basis of the 

 enthusiastic response, a proposal to expand the program was submitted. 



On February 1 4, 1 966, the Traveling Exhibition Service was placed 

 under the U.S. National Museum. Expansion of the scope of the 

 exhibits into crafts, history, technology, science, and education was 

 initiated, and exhibitions of objects and prints from the Smithsonian 

 collections are being planned with the cooperation of the curators of the 

 Museum of Natural History and the Museum of History and Tech- 

 nology. The current catalog lists four of these exhibitions for 1967. 



Requests have been received from many foreign institutions for 

 circulation abroad of exhibits such as the 1964-1965 Bridges, Tunnels 

 and Waterworks after they finish their United States tours. Funds are 

 being sought to respond to these requests. 



Art in Science and Polish Graphic Art were previewed in the Arts and 

 Industries building. The latter exhibit was opened with ceremonies 

 sponsored by the Polish Ambassador. 



During the year the small staff of the Service, which negotiates, 

 organizes, and circulates the exhibitions, explained the Service to a 

 number of foreign visitors at the request of the State Department, 

 advised other institutions on circulating specific exhibitions, and re- 

 sponded to many inquiries about the objectives and organization of the 

 Smithsonian Institution. Close liaison was maintained with foreign 

 cultural attaches and embassies. The Chief of the Service was in- 

 vited to Belgrade as the guest of the Yugoslav Commission for Cul- 

 tural Relations with Foreign Countries. 




TRAVELING EXHIBITION SERVICE 55 



Exhibitions carried over from prior years number 53. The service 

 initiated 28 new shows, dispersed 32, and negotiated for 39 new ones 

 during 1 966. During the year the exhibits were shown on 625 occasions 

 to an estimated total of 1,250,000 viewers. 



Exhibitions Initiated in 1966 



Painting and Sculpture 



Art in Science New Names in Latin American Art 



Eyewitness to Space Art Treasures of Turkey 



Pre-Columbian Gold from Peru 



Drawings and Prints 



Six Danish Graphic Artists Contemporary African Printmakers 



The World of William Hogarth Contemporary Dutch Graphics 



Mirror of the Artist Polish Graphic Art 



Action-Reaction Diirer and His Time 



Architecture 

 Art in Urban Architecture Early Chicago Architecture 



Design and Crafts 



Calligraphy in Islamic Textiles Jazz Posters 



Folk Toys from Japan Posters from Denmark 



Glass from Czechoslovakia Rugs from the McMullan Collection 



History 

 Early Monuments and Architecture of Ireland 



Children's Art 



Danish Children Illustrate Hans Ghanian Textiles 



Christian Andersen Museum Impressions 



Embroideries by Children of Chijnaya 



Natural History and Science 

 The Preservation of Abu Simbel 



Photography 

 Gentle Wilderness: The Sierra Nevada 




56 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 U.S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Exhibits Continued from Prior Years 



1964-65: Arte Programmata; Watercolors by Pop Hart; Modern Watercolors 

 from Sweden; The Art of the Yoruba; Contemporary American Drawings II; 

 William Blake: Poet, Printer, Prophet; Bridges, Tunnels, and Waterworks; 

 Contemporary Fine Presses in America; Eskimo Graphic Art III; The Fabulous 

 Decade; Kokoschka: King Lear, Apullian Journey, Hellas; Prints from the 

 Mourlot Press; Old Master Prints; American Costumes; American Furniture; 

 Masters of Ballet Design; Murals in Lace; The American Flag; Be My Guest!; 

 Brass Rubbings from England; World Fairs; Paintings by Young Balinese; 

 Paintings by Mexican Children; National High School Prints; Ancient Rock 

 Paintings and Engravings; Colors and Patterns in the Animal Kingdom; 

 The Stonecrop Family: Variations on a Pattern; The Color of Water; Pier 

 Luigi Nervi. 



1963-64: Alvar Aalto; Albers: Interaction of Color; Contemporary American 

 Landscape Architecture; Birds of Asia; Antonio Frasconi 1952-63; Hearts 

 and Flowers; The Nile; Religious Themes by Old Masters; Eero Saarinen; 

 Swiss Posters. 



1962-63: Craftsmen of the City; Historic Annapolis. 



1961-62: Physics and Painting; UNESCO Watercolor Reproductions; Con- 

 temporary Italian Drawings; The Face of Viet Nam; Le Corbusier — Chapel at 

 Ronchamp. 



1960-61 : The Image of Physics; Tropical Africa II. 



1959-60: Images of War; Paintings by Young Africans; Japan I by Werner 

 Bischof. 



1956-57: Japan II by Werner Bischof. 




Smithsonian Activities 



Natural Sciences 





For the natural sciences the year was one of reappraisal and 

 program consolidation. During this period an effort was made to 

 reassess the Institution's role in the encouragement and support of 

 of Scientific research in terms of its basic mission to increase and diffuse 

 knowledge among men and in relation to the logistic resources re- 

 quired to maintain the high quality of its research activities. It is 

 appropriate to highlight here some of the new programs and activities 

 to be described in greater detail elsewhere in this annual review in 

 order to point up changes and trends in the Institution's research 

 concepts. 



The Smithsonian's traditional interest in the biological sciences, 

 particularly in systematics, prompted creation of a Task Force for 

 Tropical Biology. Its mission was to survey the field of tropical 

 biology and to design a comprehensive Tropical Biology Research 

 Program embracing our existing scientific investigations in the Tropics 

 and at the same time identifying other zones of research warranting 

 the attention and the support of the Institution. One result of this 

 survey, as the Secretary has noted, is that the Institution has broadened 

 the research objectives and activities of its Canal Zone Biological 

 Area, and redesignated it as the Smithsonian Tropical Research 

 Institute. Also, a marine biological laboratory was added to STRI's 

 research facilities and a program of research in tropical biology, 

 involving close collaboration with other organizations concerned with 

 the tropics, was initiated. 



During the same period, the Institution established on a tract of 

 land located on the southwestern shore of the Chesapeake Bay, in 

 Maryland, the Chesapeake Bay Center for Field Biology. Its scientific 

 research program is now being formulated by a consortium of academic 

 institutions presently consisting of the Johns Hopkins University, the 

 University of Maryland, and the Smithsonian Institution. The 

 Center, which provides a natural biological preserve, both terrestrial 

 and estuarine, in which to conduct long-term ecological and behavioral 

 investigations, is visualized as the first of several field research stations 

 strategically located so that scientists can construct a set of normal 

 ecological standards, or so-called ecological bench marks. This 

 system will permit them to measure and compare ecological changes, 

 including those resulting from controlled environmental manipulation. 



The research objectives of the Office of Anthropology were broadened 

 to include a Program of Urgent Anthropology designed to investigate 



59 




60 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



and document the cultures, languages, and physical characteristics of 

 isolated communities and tribes threatened with extinction through 

 assimilation and the encroachments of modern civilization. Professor 

 Sol Tax of the University of Chicago is serving as a special advisor in 

 anthropology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution in order 

 to facilitate this program. 



Another noteworthy change is the enlargement of the scientific 

 responsibilities of the Office of Oceanography to include limnology. 

 The Institution historically has been a leader in biological ocean- 

 ography, and this enlargement is a tangible expression of its concern 

 with the need for encouraging basic research concerned with fresh- 

 water resources, especially lakes and rivers. The Office of Oceanog- 

 raphy and Limnology has established a unique Oceanographic 

 Research Guidance Committee to assist the Institution in assessing the 

 taxonomic and ecological resources needed to support the research 

 programs of public agencies and universities in the field of oceanography. 

 The rapidly growing national program in oceanography involving 

 the collection of marine organisms from the oceans of the world, 

 requires facilities for processing and identifying specimens. The 

 Committee will apprise the Institution of the status of oceanographic 

 research programs and expeditions to that any necessary taxonomic 

 assistance can be made available through the Smithsonian Ocean- 

 ographic Sorting Center and through the research efforts of its scientists. 



To further the objectives of the International Biological Program and 

 to consolidate the several investigations conducted by our scientists, 

 a Smithsonian Institution Committee for the International Biological 

 Program was formed. One noteworthy project initiated under this 

 Program concerns the Center for Ecological Research, established in 

 Belem, Brazil, which offers scientists from the United States and else- 

 where an unparalled opportunity to collaborate on numerous inter- 

 disciplinary ecological problems in the field. 



The problem of providing adequate logistic support for the Institu- 

 tion's many research activities in the natural sciences has come in for 

 a careful appraisal. As a result, the Smithsonian Research Awards 

 Program concerns the center for ecological research established in 

 who require "seed money" to initiate projects or to advance investiga- 

 tions in progress. The Program was established to provide a mech- 

 anism for responding rapidly to urgent financial requirements that 

 cannot wait for the usual review and budgeting procedures. 



During this same period, the Institution established the Smithsonian 

 Research Foundation as a means for increased administrative and 

 logistic flexibility in the support of research projects. In this connec- 

 tion, the Institution has established an annual inventory of research 




NATURAL SCIENCES 61 



projects in order to determine the current and future resources needed 

 to sustain the Institution's scientific research programs. A project- 

 planning system was devised to enable each investigator to present 

 the status of his research project as well as the future fiscal and man- 

 power requirements for maintaining an optimum level of research 

 activity. 



Finally, computer programs and automatic data processing tech- 

 niques are being adopted for the collection, storage, and retrieval of 

 information concerning museum specimens. As a first step in this 

 process, an electronic punchtape system is being used to produce at one 

 operation a tape from which cross-indexed catalog cards, specimen 

 labels, and shipping lists can be produced. 





Museum of Natural History 



Richard S. Cowan, Director 



~\ tore and more the museum scientist, whose goal is to elucidate the 

 ■*■*■*- particular aspect of nature that is his specialty, finds that to 

 achieve his goal he must seek data from ancillary fields to complement 

 the conventional criteria of his own field. Thus, as his scientific 

 horizons widen and he attacks larger, more complex problems, he 

 finds that the research team approach is essential. 



In anthropology for example, teams of botanists, archaeologists, and 

 geologists are working together to solve the riddle of ancient man's 

 existence in the Oaxaca Valley of Mexico. In zoology, taxonomists 

 are working directly with histologists and anatomists to unravel the 

 mysteries of evolution in several groups of animals. In at least two 

 major groups of plants, chemical data are being used to support the 

 validity of gross morphology in the study of their systematics. In 

 mineral sciences, rocks from the deep-water mid-Atlantic ridge and 

 extra-terrestrial meteorites and tektites are being analyzed by the 

 non-destructive electron probe. In paleobiology, the significance of 

 variation in fossil animal populations is being tested and evaluated on 

 the basis of studies of modern forms. In entomology, the subadult 

 stages are being studied along with the total biology of the organism 

 in order to better interpret the traditional criteria for elucidating the 

 evolution of various insect groups. 



That such studies can coexist with the more classical ones is not 

 merely evident, the conviction grows that they are truly interdependent 

 and that the Museum scientist, sharing goals with scientists in other 

 institutions — universities, for example, must seek closer ties with them. 



63 




64 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



With this in mind, it is heartening to report that an increase in the 

 number of supportive personnel has permitted our professional staff 

 to undertake such significantly broadening activities, among which, 

 perhaps, the most important are those related to education, especially 

 at the graduate or near-graduate level. In summer 1966 numerous 

 college students served as temporary interns, working in the collections. 

 Graduate students are working independently or with members of the 

 staff for the doctorate degree. And several post-doctoral fellows are 

 likewise studying in the collections. These, especially, while solving 

 their own research problems, broaden the understanding and interest 

 of our own people. But educational activities are not confined to 

 non-Smithsonian researchers coming to work with our collections and 

 with our scientists, for a growing number of the research staff are 

 establishing formal and informal educational relationships with 

 universities, both local and more distant. Several members of the 

 staff are conducting seminars at these centers of learning, others have 

 been granted leave of absence from the Institution to teach courses for 

 one or more semesters, and a number are preparing to participate in a 

 pilot program that will integrate the exhibits of the Museum with the 

 curriculum of the District of Columbia secondary schools. 



The growing concern of the scientific staff that it relate more closely 

 to the mainstream of science is further attested to by its broad participa- 

 tion in both national and international meetings. Smithsonian policy 

 seeks to have representation at every national or international scientific 

 meeting of significance to the areas of our interest. In consequence, 

 one or another of the scientific staff has journeyed to distant parts 

 of the globe in the past year to interact with his counterparts overseas. 

 In addition, a substantial number of conferences and symposia involv- 

 ing outstanding scholars from this country and from abroad, have 

 been convened at the Museum to discuss mutual problems, to formulate 

 research programs, and to evaluate the progress of organizational units 

 with respect to their ultimate goals. 



In biological research, the necessity for studying organisms in their 

 living condition has understandably led to increased scientific travel 

 to the field. It is with the deepest sadness and a sense of irreparable 

 loss that it must be reported that one of the research staff gave his life 

 in the service of science during the past year. Dr. E. Yale Dawson, 

 whose article immediately follows this statement, was drowned in the 

 Red Sea June 22 while studying the kinds, distribution, and ecological 

 relationships of the marine algae there. An incredibly well-organized 




MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY INTRODUCTION 65 



and outstandingly productive researcher, Yale Dawson will be re- 

 membered equally as a warm, friendly human who always had time 

 for the interests of others. Though he himself is gone, the work he 

 accomplished in research and in building the algological collections 

 in the Museum will stand for a very long time as a monument to the 

 industry and devotion he applied to his every scientific undertaking. 

 To his memory, the following report on the Museum's activities for 

 1966, a year unparalleled for scientific progress, is dedicated. 



Marine Botany at the Smithsonian 



Early in its history the Smithsonian Institution recognized the 

 significance to man of a knowledge of the vegetation of the sea. Its 

 Contributions to Knowledge in the years 1851 to 1858 included a sumptuous 

 monograph by W. H. Harvey on the seaweeds of North America, a 

 work which has served as a superlative model to marine botany ever 

 since. 



During succeeding years the study of marine animals in the Smith- 

 sonian's Museum of Natural History far outstripped the study of plants 

 of the sea. The classical collections of Harvey remained, however, in 

 the National Herbarium, and to them were added through the years 

 some 25,000 specimens of seaweeds of the world. 



The vast oceanographic enterprise of the International Indian Ocean 

 Expedition in the early 1960s, in which the Museum of Natural History 

 became deeply involved, provided a new impetus. The need for 

 marine botanical studies became sharply evident, and from that need, 

 a plan was developed through the office of the Assistant Director 

 (Oceanography) to renew and to expand the established interests of 

 the Smithsonian Institution in the vegetation of the sea. Activation 

 of these plans was begun in 1963, and they received their most effective 

 encouragement in 1965 with the establishment of an algal research 

 facility in the new west wing of the Museum of Natural History. This 

 facility, its use and application, has expanded rapidly during the past 

 year. Some of the exciting and promising aspects of the program are 

 outlined below. 



MARINE BOTANY FOR MARINE STATIONS 



The marked advance of higher education in biology in the United 

 States is nowhere better illustrated than by the rapid advances since 

 World War II in the field of oceanography, with all its biological 

 ramifications. Nor has the new emphasis on marine sciences been 

 confined to seaside institutions, for numerous inland colleges and uni- 




66 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



versities are successfully seeking to provide marine facilities for their 

 students. Yet these advances have not been achieved without growing 

 pains. On the Pacific Coast, in 1940 there were, for example, but five 

 marine laboratories, whereas now there are 22, and at each of these 

 where courses in marine biology are taught, publications describing 

 local faunas and floras are needed to serve teacher, student, and re- 

 searcher in the identification of the organisms being studied. Yet since 

 1944, only a single local marine algal manual (designed for use at the 

 Hopkins Marine Station in Pacific Grove, California), has been avail- 

 able for the entire Pacific Coast with its varied and elaborate algal 

 representation. 



Recognizing this need, the Smithsonian Institution in 1965 began to 

 encourage the preparation of identification manuals on the marine 

 plants of the Pacific Coast. In cooperation with Humboldt State 

 College at Areata, California, and the National Science Foundation, 

 a course in marine botany was presented, and, with che help of the 

 class, an identification manual was written for the seaweeds in the 

 vicinity of the new marine facility at nearby Trinidad. Currently, in 

 collaboration with the University of Arizona and the Office of Naval 

 Research, a similar manual is being completed for the algal flora near 

 the new marine facility, on the upper Gulf of California, jointly operated 

 by the University of Arizona and the University of Sonora. 

 . Obviously, the rapid development of marine laboratory facilities of 

 California, of which a major new one is that established on Catalina 

 Island by the University of Southern California, makes imperative a 

 modern and thorough treatment of the marine algae of the entire 

 State. The Smithsonian, through arrangement with the Stanford 

 University Press and with partial support of the Office of Naval 

 Research, is now engaged in preparing such a "Marine Algae of 

 California," coauthored by Dr. Isabella Abbott of the Hopkins Marine 

 Station, Dr. G. J. Hollenberg of the University of Redlands, Dr. 

 Paul C. Silva of the University of California at Berkeley, and the writer. 

 This study involves the treatment and illustration of nearly a thousand 

 species. Many of these, especially the deepwater forms, have re- 

 mained underscribed to date, and new entities are being discovered 

 regularly as underwater explorations are conducted by diver-botantists. 

 The Smithsonian Institution has been collaborating with the Uni- 

 versity of California at Santa Barbara in such exploration in the 

 southern California Channel Islands, through Dr. Michael Neushul 

 and his students at the marine laboratory in Goleta. 



Another aspect of the rapid expansion of marine stations in this 

 country and the enormous enlargement of student bodies in marine 

 science is the concurrent need for more instruction in marine botany. 




MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY INTRODUCTION 67 



Traditionally, the subject has been taught only by highly specialized 

 researchers in marine algae, and no textbook on marine botany, as 

 such, has been available to the less specialized botany teachers. The 

 Smithsonian Institution recently supported the completion of the 

 first such textbook which, in conjunction with the use of local marine 

 floras such as are available or in progress, will make possible the 

 teaching of marine botany at almost any college or university in the 

 nation to which representative marine plants can be brought. Such 

 a course, as part of the Smithsonian's program, will be presented in 

 early 1967 at the University of Arizona, in Tucson, a seemingly un- 

 likely place for the subject, but one at which much marine interest 

 has been aroused by the provision of marine facilities only four hours 

 distant in connection with the experimental desalination plant at 

 Puerto Penasco, Sonora, Mexico, operated by the U.S. Department 

 of the Interior. 



THE HERBARIUM IN FLORISTIC RESEARCH 



The conduct of phytogeographic research in the algae, as in any 

 other group of organisms, requires the use of large collections for com- 

 parative examination. The more comparative material that is avail- 

 able, the more conclusive can be the taxonomic results and the more 

 reliable the interpretations of specimens of an organism to which a 

 useful name is assigned. The building up of the algal reference col- 

 lections at the Smithsonian's Museum of Natural History is a major 

 consideration. Although 25,000 specimens had accumulated up to 

 1965, no concerted effort had been made to develop a useful world 

 representation, nor had adequate provision been made for deposition 

 of liquid-preserved algal materials. 



Beginning in spring 1965, fieldwork directed toward assembling an 

 extensive working collections of liquid-preserved algae was undertaken 

 in California, in the Gulf of California, and in the Bahamas. A 

 fortunate circumstance early in this program led to the acquisition by 

 the Smithsonian of the large herbarium of the Beaudette Foundation 

 for Biological Research, containing over 7,300 specimens, including 

 1500 liquid preparations and 700 microscope slides. This algarium 

 was incorporated into the Museum's herbarium during summer 1965, 

 and to the combined collection nearly 10,000 specimens have since 

 been added through the able assistance of museum technician Charles F. 

 Rhyne. Fieldwork is currently being continued through cooperation 

 with several foreign algologists, who arranged field collecting trips for 

 the writer during the summer of 1966. These include Dr. B. Toziin, 

 University of Istanbul, Turkey; Prof. Joseph Powell, American Uni- 




68 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



versity of Beirut, Lebanon; Dr. A. A. Aleem, University of Alexandria, 

 Egypt; Dr. T. V. Desikachary, University of Madras, India; Mr. H. M. 

 Burkill, Botanic Gardens, Singapore; Dr. H. B. S. Womersley, Uni- 

 versity of Adelaide, Australia; and Dr. Valery May, Royal Botanic 

 Gardens, Sydney, Australia. 



The conduct of fieldwork and the preparation and identification of 

 specimens for the herbarium are greatly enhanced by collaboration 

 of specialists who know well their own local floras. Thus, much of 

 the field effort planned in the near future is to be conducted at estab- 

 lished algological centers where rapid assembly of materials can be 

 accomplished with the help of the most knowledgeable persons. At the 

 same time, these foreign specialists are encouraged to prepare and send 

 sets of their local materials in exchange. A number of such exchanges 

 are already active, and additional agreements are being made from 

 time to time. One of the latest of these is with the herbarium of the 

 Botanisches Museum, Berlin-Dahlem, Germany, which lost its entire 

 algal collection during World War II and is endeavoring to rebuild 

 through exchanges for specimens currently being collected in an area 

 of classical German algal research in the Adriatic Sea. 



Another major asset to the program of floristic studies and the prep- 

 aration of manuals of Pacific American marine algae has been provided 

 by the cooperation of the Allan Hancock Foundation at the University 

 of Southern California. Its director, Dr. Leslie A. Chambers, has 

 agreed to place on 5-year loan to the Smithsonian Institution the 26,000 

 algal specimens of its herbarium. The availability of these collections, 

 assembled by the writer during 20 years' research in the Pacific, will 

 greatly enhance and speed the current program. 



In addition to its herbarium collections of macroscopic algae, the 

 Smithsonian's Museum of Natural History has developed over the 

 years an outstanding collection of carefully prepared slides of diatoms. 

 These, under the care of Paul S. Conger since 1935 now number some 

 24,000 microscope slides. 



A further research facility of considerable value is the Dawson marine 

 algal library of some 5,000 titles which has been installed for use in the 

 Museum's division of cryptogams. 



MONOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF CORALLINE ALGAE 



The continued development of field manuals and textbooks, and the 

 integration of algological knowledge into a broader understanding of 

 the oceans must ultimately depend upon detailed basic research on 

 particular groups of marine algae. For many algae, even widespread 

 and common species, only superficial information is available. There 




Seaweed collecting at Trinidad, California, near the Marine Station of Hum- 

 boldt State College, one of the institutions with which the Smithsonian is 

 cooperating in marine botany research (see p. 66). Below: Seaweed and 

 sea lions at Bahia Independencia, Peru, in the southern region of the Marine 

 Botany Program. 




E. Yale Dawson sampling sea- 

 weed on a muddy shore in 

 Potrero Bay, Costa Rica. 

 Below: Phycologist at work 

 on the sea floor, Isla Brin- 

 canco, Panama. 




MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY INTRODUCTION 69 



are few specialists who enter into detailed anatomical, cytological, 

 morphological, biogeographical, and physiological investigations of 

 species and who are able, therefore, to integrate the results into system- 

 atic studies of genera and families. Some large and important groups 

 have been studied during the past century by only a handful of 

 specialists the world over. 



The "crustose corallines," the calcified benthonic marine members 

 of the red algae, comprise just such a neglected group. They occur 

 from the Tropics to the Arctic; they are the major and, in some cases, 

 even the primary elements of "coral" reefs; they form extensive banks 

 and often control bottom form and benthonic animal populations in 

 northern waters; and, being calcified, they are important fossils, 

 occurring especially abundantly in rocks of Tertiary age. As fossils, 

 they are of much interest to oil geologists because of their potential in 

 dating and in determining paleoecology. Nevertheless, because of a 

 lack of basic information, the crustose corallines are often treated in 

 regional manuals with strong reservations as to accuracy, and in 

 practice they are generally unidentifiable. 



Since 1964, Walter H. Adey of the Museum's division of paleo- 

 botany has been engaged in a biosystematic-monographic study 

 of the crustose corallines of the North Atlantic — arctic to tropic. Un- 

 fortunately, the abundant, well-preserved collections and associated 

 detailed field data needed for such a study have never been assembled, 

 and even in the North Atlantic the necessary field facilities for such 

 work are limited or not available. These difficulties notwithstanding, 

 the area from Long Island Sound to northern Labrador has now been 

 surveyed in some detail by use of small boats and diving gear. During 

 the summer of 1965 the 134-foot freighter Phykos, obtained temporarily 

 from the Navy reserve fleet, was used for preliminary study of the 

 region from Sandy Hook to the Florida Keys. This vessel also pro- 

 vided, below diving limits, a dredging and submersible capability for 

 coralline work which cannot be matched with small boats. 



Continued extensive field work is planned for the next several years. 

 Stations occupied in Jamaica during February 1966, with the assistance 

 of Thomas Goreau and his staff at the Univeristy College of the West 

 Indies, provided the additional information and collections prerequisite 

 to preparing for the intensive Tropical Western Atlantic program that 

 will begin in 1968-1969. During the summer and winter of 1966-1967 

 small boats will be used for intensive collecting of crustose corallines 

 in Iceland and Norway, and in the spring and summer of 1967 this 

 program will be extended to France and the British Isles. 



Integrated with the field investigations during 1966-1967 will be a 

 "type" search and study program, at European museums, directed 




70 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



toward providing a firmer taxonomic base for crustose corallines. 

 This is necessary because the literature of coralline algae is largely 

 deficient in the kind of detailed information on type specimens needed 

 for accurate taxonomic interpretations. In many cases the whereabouts 

 or even existence of type specimens is in doubt and must be researched 

 and established. 



ALGOLOGY ALONG PACIFIC LATIN AMERICA 



The development of the University of Arizona marine station on the 

 Gulf of California has stimulated renewed interest in the marine algae 

 of Pacific Mexico and has shown a need for a revised marine flora of 

 the Gulf of California to serve not only the station but other nascent 

 marine facilities at Bahia de Los Angeles, at La Paz, at Guaymas, and 

 at Mazatlan. In addition, a developing economic exploitation of sea- 

 weed resources along the Pacific Coast of Mexico has created need for 

 a more thorough knowledge of the kinds and distributions of Mexican 

 algae. Several important species are currently being harvested along 

 northwestern Baja California, Mexico, and the Smithsonian Institution 

 has recently been instrumental in the birth of a new industry in the 

 Gulf of California. There, through our assistance, Marine Colloids, 

 Inc., of Rockland, Maine, has been successful in finding and initiating 

 the harvesting of Eucheuma uncinatum, a seaweed much needed as a raw 

 material for the production of industrial phycocolloids. 



A major focal point of biological attention along Pacific Latin 

 America in recent years has been the Galapagos Islands. The Amer- 

 ican Secretariat of the Charles Darwin Foundation for the Galapagos 

 Islands is now situated in the Department of Botany, and several 

 Smithsonian scientists are currently studying material obtained in 

 1964 on the expedition of the Galapagos International Scientific 

 Project. Preliminary accounts of the cacti, the marine algae, and 

 several groups of insects have been completed, and work on the amphi- 

 pods and other animal groups is in progress. Several members of the 

 Department of Botany are participating in the preparation of a new 

 flora of the Galapagos being undertaken by the California Academy 

 of Sciences through support of the National Science Foundation. 

 Marine algal studies are continuing, and the Galapagos marine flora 

 is currently being compared with the marine flora of mainland Ecuador 

 and Peru. Planned collaboration in this program includes phycolo- 

 gists Cesar Acleto of the Universidad de San Marcos, Lima, Peru, and 

 Sylvia E. Taylor of Dunedin, Florida, both research participants on 

 recent Pacific South American cruises of the National Science Founda- 

 tion's research vessel Anton Br nun. 




MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY INTRODUCTION 71 



A further objective of the Pacific Latin American marine algal work 

 is the continued preparation of floristic accounts and of illustrated 

 identification keys to the genera and species. These are aimed at 

 stimulating interest and promoting algological studies by resident 

 investigators in the various eastern Pacific republics. Such manuals, 

 in Spanish and English, have been prepared with support of the Office 

 of Naval Research for El Salvador and for Pacific Central America, 

 generally. A Spanish edition of Seaweeds of Peru is planned by 

 Sr. Acleto, who is expected as a visiting investigator at the Smithsonian 

 Institution during 1966-1967. 



E. Yale Dawson 

 Division of Cryptogams 




Research and Publication 



SYSTEMATIGS 



While the overall objective of the office of systematics is to facilitate 

 systematic undertakings within the entire biological community, its 

 main concern is to help systematists in the Museum of Natural History 

 initiate and extend research projects, especially those with an orientation 

 transcending departmental structure. Externally the office seeks to 

 develop in the entire scientific community an awareness of and appreci- 

 ation for the stature, intrinsic importance, and intellectual content of 

 systematics. 



The Office contracted with the Federal Services Division of the 

 International Business Machine Corporation for a study of how data 

 processing methods techniques can be applied to museum problems. 

 Funds provided by the Office of Systematics enabled the department of 

 invertebrate zoology to purchase equipment with which one operator 

 can catalog all the very large number of collections being accessioned 

 by the department, and which at the same time prints index cards on 

 as many parameters as desired. In addition, the same operation 

 automatically generates paper tape bearing the data from the collec- 

 tions, and these data may then be inserted automatically in a central 

 data center. It has been estimated that as much as a 60 percent in- 

 crease in the efficiency of the cataloging operation is gained by having 

 this equipment. 



A conference of distinguished primatologists was convened to assist 

 in the development of a primatology program for the Museum of 

 Natural History. The implementation of their planning in conjunction 

 with that of the division of mammals is expected in the next fiscal year. 



Funds were provided for a joint study of the systematics of fishes of 

 the mackerel assemblage by Tetsuo Matsui of the Institute of Oceano- 

 ography and Robert Gibbs of the division of fishes. This support 

 enabled Matsui to visit to the Smithsonian Institution for the purpose 

 of studying the Atlantic populations of some of these fishes, on which 

 Gibbs is a recognized specialist; this was especially important since 

 Matsui previously had worked only with Indian and Pacific Ocean 

 materials. 



72 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ECOLOGY 73 



Systematic research is often hampered by a lack of knowledge of 

 Oriental and less familiar languages in which scientific results are 

 sometimes reported. Assistance was provided for the translation of 

 critical research papers which were important to the successful com- 

 pletion of monographic studies. 



ECOLOGY 



In recognition of the challenges and opportunities in the field of 

 environmental biology, the Smithsonian on July 1, 1965, established 

 an Office of Ecology. This new Office is headed by Dr. Helmut K. 

 Buechner, formerly professor of zoology at Washington State Uni- 

 versity, Pullman, Washington. 



The foundations for a program in ecology at the Smithsonian have 

 existed for some time. Extensive biological collections such as those 

 at the Smithsonian are essential for precise determination of the com- 

 ponents of the ecosystems under study; the Smithsonian has long 

 engaged in a variety of ecological and behavioral studies at the Smith- 

 sonian Tropical Research Institute on Barro Colorado Island, Panama; 

 and excellent experimental programs on photosynthesis and the effects 

 of radiation on organisms have been developed at the Smithsonian 

 Radiation Biology Laboratory. 



Against this background the Smithsonian is now building a program 

 in environmental biology that will extend through all levels of biological 

 organization. At the cellular and subcellular levels, and reaching up- 

 ward into the organismal level, it hopes to expand the Radiation 

 Biology Laboratory to provide a broad base in environmental physi- 

 ology. Present research there is concentrated on plants — in studies of 

 the transmittal of solar energy into metabolic responses, storage aspects 

 of photosynthesis, energy conversion, and genetic mutations induced by 

 radiation. Expansion of the program on the animal side in close 

 association with the scientists at the National Zoological Park would 

 provide the physiological foundation essential to an overall program 

 in environmental biology. At the organismal level, ecological ap- 

 proaches contribute to an understanding of phylogenetic relationships 

 and evolutionary biology. At the higher levels of biological organi- 

 zation — population systems, vegetation, and whole ecosystems — the 

 Smithsonian is expanding into new fields. By adding this new dimen- 

 sion effectively, it hopes to develop a broadly conceived, integrated 

 program in ecology of significance both to science and to society. 



Within this general framework, the Smithsonian is now in the process 

 of refining objectives to identify those areas in which effective contribu- 




74 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



tions can be made through its own unique program and through an 

 integration of its efforts with those at universities and other institutions 

 here and overseas. In this connection the Smithsonian is initiating a 

 survey of leading university programs in ecology to determine how 

 and where it can contribute best to the growth of knowledge vital to 

 establishing harmonious adjustments between man and his environ- 

 ment in the years ahead. 



One way in which the Smithsonian can collaborate with universities 

 is through its new foreign currency program. Under this program, 

 initiated a little over a year ago, the Institution now has the financial 

 capacity to pursue reseaixh in archaeology and anthropology in the 

 countries where foreign currencies have been declared excess. These 

 funds, derived from the sale of agricultural commodities, are made 

 available to the Smithsonian under Public Law 480. Beginning in 

 Fiscal Year 1967 the foreign currency program will be expanded 

 substantially into environmental biology and oceanography. Through 

 the use of these funds the Smithsonian has an unusual opportunity to 

 combine and direct the efforts of anthropologists and ecologists toward 

 developing a more complete history of man's environmental relation- 

 ships as a basis for understanding his current behavior in various 

 regional ecosystems. Foreign currencies will enable the Smithsonian 

 to develop programs to study the structure and functions of natural 

 ecosystems, with a view toward conservation and the orderly develop- 

 ment of natural resources, in countries like India, Pakistan, and Ceylon. 

 Both inventory and descriptive types of ecological investigations will 

 be required, but thorough understanding of ecosystems will depend on 

 studies of energy conversion through primary and secondary trophic 

 levels, of the dynamics of population systems, and of regulatory mech- 

 anisms of the system. It will be necessary, however, for the Smith- 

 sonian to develop capabilities for handling ecosystem studies at home 

 as well as abroad. 



The International Biological Program (IBP), which has a strong 

 focus on environmental biology with a view toward broadening the 

 productivity base for human populations, will provide unprecedented 

 opportunity for ecological research and international conservation 

 efforts during the 5-year period from 1967 to 1972. The Smithsonian 

 will be engaged in the terrestrial conservation program of the IBP. 

 Dr. Lee M. Talbot, an internationally known conservationist on the 

 staff of the Office of Ecology, will work closely with the terrestrial 

 conservation section of the IBP in the establishment of a World Network 

 of Nature Reserves and the development of a world program in 

 conservation. It is highly important that ecological benchmarks be 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ECOLOGY 75 



set aside for scientific research. Some of these may be National Parks, 

 others, Wilderness areas, and still others, small Nature Reserves. They 

 should not be merely set aside for posterity — they should be carefully 

 studied for their contributions to knowledge now and in the future. 

 One of our major contributions to this network of reserves can be in 

 the inventories of the biological components and general descriptions 

 of the ecosystems preserved. 



The success of the IBP will depend largely on the rapid training 

 of young people at all educational levels. Through its new division of 

 education and training the Smithsonian can contribute to the educa- 

 tional program of the IBP. On-the-job training with the collections 

 at the Institution and in the field under the guidance of our own 

 scientists and those from cooperating universities will be an essential 

 part of the Smithsonian participation in the IBP. 



During 1965 the Smithsonian established the Chesapeake Bay 

 Center for Field Biology on about 700 acres of land about 7 miles 

 south of Annapolis, on the west shore of the Bay. To the original 

 Forrest bequest, known as Java Farm, the southern portion of Ivy 

 Neck has been added through the cooperation of Miss Adelaide 

 Colhoun and a generous grant from the Ford Foundation. The 

 Smithsonian on February 9, 1966, formed a consortium with The 

 Johns Hopkins University and the University of Maryland for coopera- 

 tion in research and education. It is an open-ended consortium, which 

 may be joined by other universities in the Washington area, in what 

 it is hoped will become an intellectually stimulating venture. Dr. Kyle 

 Barbehenn, Director for the new Center, is now planning a well- 

 rounded research program with the universities, including studies of 

 vegetation change, field and laboratory studies of social behavior of 

 mammals, estuarian ecology, and population regulation. 



One of our most important facilities in the developing ecological 

 program is the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (formerly the 

 Canal Zone Biological Area). Over the past 20 years an impressive 

 series of studies have emanated from this island station. Recent em- 

 phasis, under the excellent leadership of its Director, Martin H. 

 Moynihan, has been on comparative behavior of primates, the evolution 

 of interspecific relations, the significance of social signal systems, social 

 organization and behavior of tropical birds, and isolating mechanisms 

 in marine fishes (a detailed report of this work appears on p. 1 63) . STRI 

 provides a model and a base for expanding ecological research in the 

 New World tropics. Increased activity in tropical research has been 

 initiated under the guidance of Dr. F. Raymond Fosberg, a newly 

 appointed specialist on tropical biology who comes to the Smithsonian 




76 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



from the Geological Survey with a wealth of tropical experience. The 

 increased emphasis on tropical biology is in recognition of the signif- 

 icance of this region to an understanding of the principles of ecology 

 and evolutionary biology. 



A conference on bird life in central and northern Latin America, 

 supported by a grant from The Conservation Foundation, was held at 

 the Smithsonian April 13-15, 1966. The objective was to assess 

 numerical changes in the populations of both resident and migratory 

 birds in relationship to alterations in their habitats. This conference 

 was first proposed by William Vogt, Secretary of The Conservation 

 Foundation, who wondered whether the destruction of rain forests 

 and other changes in vegetation might not have as much influence on 

 recent declines in the numbers of migratory birds as agricultural 

 pesticides. 



Most of the seven contributors from the five Latin American coun- 

 tries represented, and appi-oximately a dozen contributors from the 

 United States, agreed that because of their adaptability to wintering 

 habitats, most migratory birds that breed in the north temperate 

 zone can survive considerable environmental changes in their winter 

 ranges. On the other hand, the conservation of resident species, 

 particularly those of the humid tropical forests, is a much more serious 

 problem. These birds, which through a long period of evolution are 

 adapted to rain forests for nesting, are apparently losing ground. 



A group of conferees, headed by John W. Aldrich, compiled a list 

 of 2 1 suggestions for action based on the conference papers and discus- 

 sions. Among these the principal points covered were: (1) conservation 

 of all renewable natural resources, as a basis for preservation of avifauna; 

 (2) inventories and descriptions of samples of ecosystems; (3) control 

 of illegal traffic in live birds and turtles and in cayman skins; (4) inter- 

 national fellowships for training Latin American technicians; (5) trans- 

 lations into Spanish of bird guides, of examples of successful conser- 

 vation efforts, and of digests of books and articles on conservation; 

 (6) the organization of bird-banding programs; (7) the development of 

 intergovernmental studies on changes in the abundance of migratory 

 birds; (8) international exchange of information; and (9) research, 

 education, and publicity. 



The results of this conference may assist greatly, not only in the 

 preservation of bird life, but in the overall conservation of renewable 

 natural resources in northern Latin America. 



In summary, the Smithsonian plans to form a small group of some of 

 the best research scholars in the country who will integrate their 

 efforts (1) to contribute to theory in population biology and ecosystem 

 science and (2) to provide information essential to the Federal Govern- 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION OCEANOGRAPHY 77 



ment in the evolution of our society in the critical years ahead. In 

 this challenging new era of ecological orientation the Smithsonian can 

 serve as a point of focus for both national and international programs 

 in basic research and education. The Smithsonian is in a position to 

 play a major role in the IBP — the outgrowth of which it is hoped will 

 be a continuing emphasis on environmental biology as the background 

 for harmonious relationships of human societies within the world's 

 ecosystems. 



As opportunities for making contributions to ecosystem science 

 and conservation emerge, the Smithsonian stands ready to accept its 

 responsibilities in the firm conviction that the survival of human soci- 

 eties at high standards of living in quality environments depends on 

 what is accomplished in environmental biology within the next decade. 



OCEANOGRAPHY 



As has been the case in recent years, the Smithsonian plays a key role 

 in biological oceanographic operations at the federal level. We are 

 the national center for the identification and study of whole marine 

 organisms. Although complementary studies of commercial and sports 

 fisheries are made by the Department of the Interior, the Institution 

 provides basic information on the kinds, distributions, and populations 

 of organisms in the world ocean. 



The principal work of the oceanography program is the support of 

 specimen-oriented research that leads to the preparation of mono- 

 graphs of groups of marine organisms, showing their relationships and 

 describing their ecology. 



The Institution's staff members participated during the past year 

 in 74 cruises of 14 ships belonging to 10 organizations. 



The oceanography effort was expanded to include marine sedi- 

 mentology. Cores and sediments have been given to the Institution 

 by the Navy, the Coast Guard, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the 

 Army Engineers, the Geological Survey, and other organizations. 

 A new constant low temperature storage facility has been constructed 

 and cores from the National Science Foundation's deep coring project 

 will be transferred soon from their temporary storage area to our 

 facility. Rocks from the mid-Atlantic ridge and from other oceanic 

 areas have been collected and sent from other sources to the Institution 

 for study by our active petrology group. 



In cooperative project undertaken with the U.S. National Academy 

 of Sciences and the Government of the Republic of China, Assistant 

 Director I. E. Wallen spent four weeks in Taiwan advising on ocean- 

 ography development. The Institution, with support from the 




78 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Department of State, sent Wallen to the meeting of a special panel 

 of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission on Mutual 

 Assistance to Developing Countries. 



The Smithsonian Oceanographic Sorting Center continued to expand 

 its operations: the shipment of specimens increased, with 2,844,941 

 being sent to 190 specialists from 27 countries during the year, as 

 contrasted to 2,260,949 to 70 specialists in the prior 2% years of its 

 existence. The total of specimens sorted during the year was 3,527,415, 

 against 4,924,210 for the previous 2% years. The involvement of 

 specialists from 27 countries emphasized the point that there does not 

 exist in any one country the capability to identify all marine organisms. 

 Biological oceanography as practiced in the Smithsonian Institution is 

 as international as the seas themselves. 



During the year the surplus oceanographic vessel Phykos was used 

 for 2}{ months before being laid up. The small sailing yacht Ellida, 

 acquired as a gift, was reconditioned at modest cost and was used for 

 research in the Chesapeake Bay area during May and June 1966. 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



Two additional senior research scientists joined the office of anthro- 

 pology this year, John C. Ewers, formerly Director of the Museum 

 of History and Technology, and T. Dale Stewart, formerly Director 

 of the Museum of Natural History. Both had accomplished sub- 

 stantial amounts of research and writing during past years, in spite of 

 the demands of their administrative duties; they will now be able to 

 devote much more time to their scholarly activities. 



During the year, John C. Ewers completed seven papers on the 

 ethnohistory of the Great Plains and on the artists who recorded or 

 interpreted its Indians. He also began work on an historical intro- 

 duction to a centennial edition of George Catlin's O-kee-pa, the famous 

 artist's major descriptive contribution to ethnology, to be published 

 by the Yale University Press. He served as chairman of the planning 

 committee of the Smithson Bicentennial Celebration, held at the 

 Institution from September 16 to 19, 1965. On June 5, 1966, The 

 University of Montana awarded Ewers the honorary degree of Doctor 

 of Laws, in recognition of his contributions to museology and to the 

 history and ethnology of the Plains Indians. 



T. Dale Stewart worked on his report on the archeological site in 

 Stafford County, Virginia, known as Patawameke, from which 

 Pocahontas was kidnapped in 1613 and taken to Jamestown. He 

 edited portions of the volume on physical anthropology of the Handbook 

 of Middle American Indians, being published by the University of Texas 




Chesapeake Bay Center for Field Biology. Grants (see pp. 14 and 45) have 

 enabled the Smithsonian and its associates in the consortium — The Johns 

 Hopkins University and the University of Maryland- — -to add two key parcels 

 of land to the recentiy established Center. The three peninsulas that make 

 up the southern half of Ivy Neck Farm are shown in the foreground while the 

 B-shaped Corn Island is in the upper right. Hog Island, lying beyond Corn 

 Island, and the forest to the right of that Island are part of the original 

 Forrest bequest of 368 acres, acquired in 1962. The Center now contains 

 700 acres, including mature forest, second growth, old fields, cultivated fields, 

 and salt marsh. With control of over 10 miles of shoreline, it is the largest 

 undeveloped expanse on the western shore of the Chesapeake Bay. It lies a 

 mere 7 miles south of Annapolis and an hour's drive from Washington or 

 Baltimore, making it a convenient site for the use of biologists in the region. 

 As the facility develops, it should attract students of ecology and behavior 

 from around the world. (Official U.S. Navy photo.) 




Etruscan amphora of the late 6th century B.C. before and after cleaning in the 

 anthropology conservation laboratory. Below: Example of thickening in 

 Neolithic skulls from Turkey (see p. 85) caused by anemia, probably the 

 result of chronic malarial infection: Top one is normal, middle (cremated) 

 and bottom ones are thickened. 



x kf 





- > 






RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ANTHROPOLOGY 79 



Press, and he outlined exhibit scripts for the section of the hall of 

 physical anthropology concerned with ancient man. 



Waldo R. Wedel was in the field in the summer of 1965, assisted by 

 museum specialist George S. Metcalf and five university students, 

 excavating an early historic Indian village in central Kansas. Believed 

 to have been inhabited by a Wichita Indian group about A.D. 

 1500-1 700, the site consists of refuse heaps scattered around an elliptical 

 pattern of shallow oblong depressions placed end-to-end around a 

 low earth mound. Excavations in 1940 had disclosed two long narrow 

 curving pithouses inside the ring of surface depressions. In 1965, two 

 more such pithouses were found; with those opened previously, they 

 formed a subrectangular pattern around the mounded center and 

 within the ring of depressions or "borrow pits." No similar structures 

 or arrangement of structures have yet been reported from the Plains 

 region or elsewhere. From their floors, beneath a thick layer of burned 

 roof and wall material, were taken much pottery, and stone, bone, and 

 shell artifacts generally like those found elsewhere on the site in stor- 

 age pits and refuse mounds. From their central location in the village 

 and their unusual construction and arrangement, it is tentatively in- 

 ferred that these earth-covered pithouses probably represented the 

 dwellings of the village leaders. 



At two other village sites lying about 800 and 2,100 yards east and 

 south of the circle excavated, similar circles of depressions occur around 

 a central mound. The line connecting their centers runs 30° south of 

 due east, and, projected to the eastern horizon, corresponds exactly 

 with the sunrise position at the winter solstice. Local observers on 

 December 21-22, 1965, verified the alignment of these two circles 

 with the rising sun. Since no obvious topographical or other reason 

 appears for such an alignment, and in light of other alignments and 

 orientations of sites and features, the location of these circles and their 

 unique character argues for an intentional or planned placement on 

 a recognized axis. These findings suggest strongly that the Wichita 

 Indians of the 16th and 17th centuries, like their contemporaries among 

 the upper Rio Grande pueblos, had a ceremonial calendar based on an 

 astronomical year beginning with the winter solstice, instead of a 

 descriptive calendar like most of their Plains neighbors in which the 

 time reckoning began with some event of particular importance to 

 the Indian. 



Scattered and disarticulated human bones found in the four pithouses, 

 some of them charred or burned, suggest the possibility of enemy action 

 or that human sacrifice was practiced. Ethnographic data indicate 

 that winter solstice rituals in the Southwest were somehow connected 

 with human sacrifice. Further examinations at other of the known 




80 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



circles in central Kansas are urgently needed to determine more 

 accurately the relationships between these specialized structures and 

 astronomical points, and the possibility that rituals of human sacrifice 

 were directly involved. 



As a result of widespread newspaper publicity given the dig, visitors 

 came in ever-increasing numbers, averaging 30 to 50 a day during the 

 last few weeks, so that a total of about 3,000 persons, including many 

 foreign visitors, saw Smithsonian research in progress at the site. 



Henry B. Collins continued his Eskimo research, supervising the 

 preparation of two volumes issued by the Arctic Institute of North 

 America: volume 6 of the series, Anthropology of the North: Translations 

 from Russian Sources, a translation of A. P. Okladnikov's "The Soviet 

 Far East in Antiquity, An Archaeological and Historical Study of the 

 Maritime Region of the U.S.S.R.," and volume 12 of Arctic Bibliography, 

 a series which summarizes and indexes the contents of publications in 

 all fields of science, and in all languages, pertaining to the Arctic and 

 sub- Arctic regions of the world. 



Robert M. Laughlin continued his work on a Tzotzil-English, 

 English-Tzotzil dictionary (Tzotzil, a Mayan language, is spoken by 

 approximately 100,000 Indians in the state of Chiapas, southeastern 

 Mexico). The dictionary now contains some 20,000 entries. This is 

 the most complete dictionary compiled since the 16th century for any 

 American Indian language. 



As part of the Archbold-Bredin-Smithsonian Biological Survey of 

 the Island of Dominica, in the British West Indies, Clifford Evans and 

 research associate, Betty J. Meggers conducted an intensive arche- 

 ological survey on Dominica during January 1966. After field recon- 

 naissance located 22 different sites, many of which are early French 

 and English colonial rather than Indian, it was determined that the 

 ecological conditions for Indian occupation were so poor in comparison 

 to nearby Guadaloupe and Martinique and other lesser Antilles that 

 Indians must have used the island as a "stepping stone" without long 

 occupation at any one spot. 



Supported by a Smithsonian research award, a long-range program 

 of archeological research was begun in Brazil with Evans and Meggers 

 as principal investigators. Nine Brazilians trained by them in 1964 

 under the auspices of the Fulbright Commission have carried on the 

 collaborative research efforts in the field. Official negotiations and 

 agreements were arranged between the Smithsonian Institution and 

 the Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas of Brazil, which named as their 

 official representative in Brazil the Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi, in 

 Belem. The program was assisted by Artur Hehl Neiva of the Fulbright 

 Commission who served as liaison. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ANTHROPOLOGY 81 



At the close of the fiscal year, Evans and Meggers were in Brazil 

 inspecting each project to be sure that all participants were conducting 

 their work according to standardized procedures of note-taking, 

 classification, record-keeping, etc. so that at the close of the 5-8 year 

 program all interpretations from all sites are comparable. The nine 

 Brazilian archeologists have conducted field work to date in the States 

 of Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, Parana, Sao Paulo, Guanabara, 

 Rio de Janeiro, Bahia, Rio Grande do Norte and Matto Grosso. Al- 

 ready some extremely important data have been secured, including 

 deep stratified Paleo-Indian deposits in Rio Grande do Sul, and 

 pottery-bearing sites in the State of Bahia, from which pottery had not 

 previously been recorded. 



Using the hydration thickness technique of dating, Evans analyzed 

 and interpreted the obsidian artifacts from Easter Island for inclusion 

 by Thor Heyerdahl in volume two of the history and archeology of 

 Easter Island. 



The reliability of an aspect of glotto-chronology is being questioned 

 in an article now in preparation by William H. Crocker. Two Canela 

 vocabularies taken from the same group and collected by different 

 people in the same decade have been found to contain enough non- 

 cognates to account for one thousand years of geographical separation. 

 These noncognates are generally either synonyms or words with similar 

 meanings, or attributable to errors of the field workers concerned. 

 Newly collected data on the Canela messianic movement were prepared 

 for presentation at the Symposium on the Biota of the Amazon, in 

 Belem, Brazil, in June 1966.* 



For the 37th Congress of Americanists, being held in Argentina in 

 September, Crocker has prepared an acculturative history of the 

 Canela Indians since 1900. The early monograph on the Canela, 

 The Eastern Timbira, by Curt Nimuendaju, was utilized as a mid- 

 point base to assure the reliability of the information and the trends. 

 Groups of informants of different age-grades were used to reconstruct 

 the conditions of each of their adolescent initiation periods as the 

 tribe moved from one old village site to another. As a result of the 

 efficacy of this technique, a fairly full history of innovations, losses, and 

 trends has been reconstructed, with the maximum error for most 

 items being about plus or minus two years since 1900. In order to 

 continue his acculturation study of the Canela and to obtain informa- 



*As reported in Smithsonian Tear 1965 (pp. 40-42) a prophetess among the Canela 

 Indians of Brazil predicted that the traditional culture hero would come to earth 

 to save his people and turn them into civilizados. They believed her and danced 

 continuously and stole cattle to facilitate the festivities untd they were attacked 

 and driven out of their lands by the neighboring Brazilian hinterlanders. 

 230-457—66 8 




82 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



tion between field visits, Crocker has trained three Canela Indians to 

 record information on certain daily events. They write from 40 to 60 

 pages a month, and these manuscripts have been received regularly 

 by mail. It is expected that at least one autobiography can be edited 

 from these materials, and since one of the Indians makes his contribu- 

 tion partly in his own language using phonemic script, his texts will 

 serve to facilitate the linguistic analysis of the language. A system for 

 coding the Canela ethnographic materials has been worked out, and 

 a collection of about 12,000 Keysort cards is now ready for utiliza- 

 tion in the analysis of specific topics. 



Gus W. Van Beek concentrated his research on the pre-Islamic pot- 

 tery chronology of Hajar Bin Humeid, the longest continuously oc- 

 cupied pre-Islamic site as yet excavated in southern Arabia. In 

 addition to the ongoing descriptive work, technical studies of certain 

 types of pottery were initiated. One of these, in collaboration with 

 William Melson of the department of mineral sciences, involves the 

 petrographic analysis of representative pottery types to permit a more 

 accurate description of the composition of the pottery. The other, in 

 collaboration with Edward V. Sayre of the Brookhaven National Lab- 

 oratory, utilizes neutron activation analysis to investigate the composi- 

 tion of one type of pottery, sand-tempered ware, with a wide 

 distribution at a number of sites stretching in a belt from northeastern 

 Ethiopia to Hadhramaut in southern Arabia; this analysis of trace 

 elements should show whether sherds from all sites are identical and 

 these data will indicate whether examples of this ware were made at 

 one or more centers and whether direct trade was involved in its 

 distribution. 



During the year, Van Beek also studied the enigmatic monolithic 

 stele at Axum, Ethiopia, and presented before the African Studies 

 Association, meeting in Philadelphia, October 27-30, 1965, a paper 

 entitled "The Monuments of Axum in the Light of South Arabian 

 Archeology," in which it was shown that these gigantic granite stele 

 probably belong to the beginning of the Christian era in Ethiopia 

 (A.D. 327), and must be interpreted in the light of the then rapidly 

 developing Christian symbolism. He also prepared a survey and 

 annotated bibliography on the archeology of Arabia during the period 

 from 1960 to 1965 for the Council on Old World Archaeology. 



William C. Sturtevant continued his research on the culture of the 

 Seminole Indians and related topics, in Washington and through 

 visits to museums and archival collections elsewhere. He also initiated 

 a long-term project aimed towards an exhaustive catalog of all illus- 

 trations of Northeastern Indians done before 1860 and having any 

 claim for ethnographic accuracy. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ANTHROPOLOGY 83 



Research on the collections, in conjunction with preparation of 

 materials for exhibition in the hall of the cultures of Africa and Asia, 

 was continued by Gordon D. Gibson. 



At the Peabody Museum and at Essex Institute, both in Salem, 

 Massachusetts, Saul H. Riesenberg abstracted ethnographic and 

 historical materials from the collections of ship's logs and journals in 

 connection with his research in Micronesian ethnohistory. With the 

 aid of a native Ponapean in this country, a student at Princeton, he 

 carried forward the task of translating an important Ponapean manu- 

 script which he and John L. Fischer of Tulane University, are anno- 

 tating and preparing for publication. 



A sourcebook of Korean anthropology being prepared by Eugene I. 

 Knez, in collaboration with Chang-Soo Swanson and assisted by 

 Willie Song, will include, in translation, a selection of articles pertaining 

 to Korean life and culture written by Korean and Japanese scholars and 

 scientists representing the major subdivisions of anthropology. A 

 selected and annotated bibliography of 500 articles, monographs, and 

 books has been completed and will constitute the other half of the 

 sourcebook. Most of the Asian articles and the bibliographic items 

 have appeared in print since 1900, but are from many sources not well 

 known here, or from out-of-print journals. 



Kent V. Flannery and his field party left in December for Mexico to 

 begin their study of the prehistoric human ecology of the Valley of 

 Oaxaca. Geomorphologists Michael and Anne Kirkby began by 

 mapping the land forms and geological strata of the Valley, which is 

 in the shape of a capital T, 70 miles from north to south and 30 miles 

 east to west. It is now clear that the region was cut by the upper 

 tributaries of the Atoyac River, and is, in effect, a river valley with at 

 least three definable terraces; there never was a "giant lake" in central 

 Oaxaca as suggested by earlier investigators. The distribution of 

 archeological sites, and even the different types of soils accompanying 

 them, make it clear that the prehistoric rise to prominence of the 

 Valley of Oaxaca was not a product of any "lush, fertile, well-watered" 

 aspect attributed to the Valley by earlier writers; in fact, its rise was a 

 tribute to the ingenuity of the prehistoric Indians in making use of its 

 scanty surface water and alluvial soil. No great "irrigation civiliza- 

 tion," with centralized bureaucratic control of water resources was 

 possible here, because no single stream in the valley could be used to 

 irrigate more than a square mile; rather, there are at least 15 types of 

 irrigation going on all over the valley, with intensively local adapta- 

 tions. Some regions produce 10 alfalfa crops a year, while others can 

 grow only maguey (Agave sp.). Preliminary indications are that early 

 farmers here clung desperately to the alluvial areas with a 3-meter 




84 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



water table and spread only later into the vast stretches of marginal 

 land upstream. The oldest prehistoric phase excavated dates to 

 roughly 5000-3500 B.C. and resembles the Coxcatlan phase in the 

 Valley of Tehuacan, 160 miles to the north. 



These early agriculturalists hunted deer and rabbit in the mountains 

 near Mitla, and in the rock shelters where they camped have been 

 found occupation floors containing hundreds of plant specimens pre- 

 served by dessication. The presence of acorns and hardened deer 

 antler suggests that these were autumn encampments by groups who 

 were harvesting both wild and domestic plants as well as doing some 

 hunting. Also during Early Formative times, in the Valley, villages 

 were being built with houses having partial stone foundations and 

 walls of wattle and daub. The pottery decoration, figurines, and 

 other artifacts clearly show that important strides had already been 

 made toward the craft specialization and urbanization that mark the 

 growth of civilization in Mexico as elsewhere. 



Four main vegetational (and faunal) zones have been located in the 

 Mitla area. One is the valley floor itself, at 1 ,600 meters, characterized 

 by mesquite and prickly pear. A lower zone, the canyons east of 

 Mitla, at 1,300 meters, is arid tropical, with iguanas and kapok trees 

 {Ceiba sp.). A higher zone, on the lower mountain slopes at 1,900 

 meters, has oak, organ cactus, maguey, copal (Bursera) and guaje 

 (Lucaena). This is the richest zone in wild plants and was intensively 

 used for collecting and hunting, while the valley floor was intensively 

 used for agriculture. The fourth and last zone, the surrounding moun- 

 tain tops at 2,200 meters or more, has oak, pine, manzanita, and 

 madrono. Caves have been located in all four of these zones, and it is 

 hoped to excavate one in each this season in order to extablish use of 

 wild resources in prehistory. The definition of vegetation zones will 

 be made easier by the 800 specimens of plants collected in January and 

 February by Wallace Ernst of the department of botany. 



Tie-ins between the ethnographic work of Aubrey Williams, Univer- 

 sity of Maryland, and the archeological work have been numerous. 

 For example, working near Mitla at a purely dry-farming village, 

 Williams discovered that farmers there plant one crop a year of yellow 

 corn, black beans, and squash, in the same field, as well as a crop of 

 small black beans which are cultivated on marginal land. Four miles 

 away, at "Guila Naquitz" cave, in levels dating to A.D. 900, the 

 archeologists uncovered a series of storage pits which contained exactly 

 the same four food products. 



In February 1965, Robert L. Stephenson began a sabbatical leave 

 from his duties as Acting Director of the River Basin Surveys. Before 

 and during this leave he worked on reports on his archeological research 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION — ANTHROPOLOGY 85 



in the Whitney Reservoir area of Central Texas, on the Blue Blanket 

 Island Site, on the Potts Village Site and on the Sully Site, all of 

 Oahe Reservoir, South Dakota. 



Richard B. Woodbury and research associate, Nathalie F. S. Wood- 

 bury, in collaboration with Watson Smith, Peabody Museum, Harvard 

 University, completed a report on the 1917-1923 excavations at the 

 Zuni ruin of Hawikuh, New Mexico, which were directed by Frederick 

 Webb Hodge, formerly Director of the Bureau of American Ethnology. 

 The excavations were sponsored by the Museum of the American 

 Indian, Heye Foundation, New York, which is publishing the report. 

 Hodge's voluminous field notes and the extensive room plans and 

 drawings of pottery designs were used in the compilation. In addition, 

 the pottery was reclassified and new type definitions were prepared in 

 accordance with current archeological practice, although Hodge's 

 own stratigraphic study was discovered in manuscript form and is 

 included in the report. 



In August 1965, the Smithsonian Institution and the Georgia Kraft 

 Company of Rome, Georgia, entered jointly into a research contract 

 for the salvage of archeological sites, near Cottonton, Alabama, along 

 the Chattahoochee River, which would otherwise be lost forever through 

 the construction of a new paper mill and its supporting services. 

 Research associate C. G. Holland, conducted field work for six weeks 

 in areas ahead of the construction and as the work continues additional 

 archeological investigation will be carried out. The salvage archeology 

 is being conducted in an early to middle 18th-century Indian village 

 producing gunflints, Indian pottery, kaolin pipes, trade beads, and 

 iron artifacts. 



Olga Linares de Sapir continued archeological research in Senegal 

 as an honorary collaborator. She made extensive excavations in shell 

 mounds that unfortunately are being destroyed rapidly in the wanton 

 excavation of the shell for paving primary and secondary roads. In 

 addition to the work in Senegal she was able to travel into the 

 Cameroons, Nigeria, and Ivory Coast and compare the status of 

 archeological research in these areas with Senegal. Interesting com- 

 parative information was obtained, but only in Nigeria is there a fully 

 developed research program in archeology through the University 

 in Ibadan. 



Museum specialist George S. Metcalf, in collaboration with Kent 

 Flannery, prepared a report on an Olmec "were -jaguar" from the 

 Yucatan Peninsula. He also collaborated with Stephen de Borhegyi 

 on a study of an inscribed celt from Guatemala. 



J. Lawrence Angel, in Greece and Turkey in summer 1965, studied 

 more than 500 human skeletons from sites ranging from Paleolithic 




86 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



to 19th century A.D. The Early Neolithic material from Catal Hiiyuk 

 (N=34) in the marsh-edged Konya plain and from Nea Nikomedeia 

 (N=104) in the marshy Macedonian plain near the old coastline 

 shows a high incidence (20-30 percent) of fully developed porotic 

 hyperostosis in adults (healed) and children. This overdevelopment 

 of blood-forming diploe of skull and bone marrow (children) indicates 

 anemia, probably sicklemia or thalassemia occurring in response to 

 chronic severe infestation by malarial Plasmodium falciparum. Later 

 Neolithic skeletons from Kephala (51) on rocky Kea and bones from 

 Early Bronze Age Karatas (155) in mountainous Lycia show little or 

 no hyperostosis. Angel is synthesizing results from about 150 later 

 skeletons combined with his 1,200 from the Greek mainland to analyze 

 the interaction between such health factors as malaria, arthritis, level 

 of nutrition and age at death, and historical change. 



Lucile E. Hoyme directed a Howard University student, Walker B. 

 Moore, in the identification of juvenile skulls in the collections of the 

 Division of Physical Anthropology, in terms of physiological age at 

 death. A precoded form for automatic data processing was designed, 

 with the help of museum technician Donald J. Ortner, on which were 

 recorded stage of tooth eruption, tooth wear, caries, and suture closure. 

 Approximately 4,000 Eskimo and Aleut crania were examined, of 

 which 291 proved to be juveniles. A method was also worked out for 

 establishing the sequence of tooth eruption, and W. B. Moore used 

 this as the basis for a prize-winning exhibit at the 100th annual meeting 

 of the District of Columbia Dental Society. 



Donald J. Ortner developed methods for microprobe study of 

 mineral concentration in bone, and in a pilot study found probable 

 aging differences in Haversian systems. 



Hoyme also continued research on the geographical distribution of 

 various human cranial characteristics, to determine whether patterns 

 of distribution corresponding to climatic regions would suggest the 

 mode of action of natural selection. Certain predicted correlations 

 between cranial form and climatic factors proved absent, but it appears 

 that natural selection maintains and even increases individual variation. 

 Preliminary analysis of the American Indian and Siberian crania 

 studied suggests other internal correlations, which will be tested as the 

 research proceeds. 



Organizing and filing the data sheets of the Human Relations Area 

 Files was completed during the year. There are now files of informa- 

 tion (mostly photocopied from published sources, but also using un- 

 published material) on 266 ethnic or political groups, representing 

 the entire inhabited world. Use of the files by the Smithsonian staff 

 and by visiting scholars and other government agencies has increased 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ANTHROPOLOGY 87 



markedly. About 50 outside research projects made use of the files, 

 compared to 30 the previous year. 



River Basin Surveys 



In February 1966, Warren W. Caldwell was appointed Director of 

 the River Basin Surveys, succeeding Robert L. Stephenson, who had 

 been serving as Acting Director. 



The Smithsonian River Basin Surveys participated in a wide range 

 of archeological projects during the year, concentrating on the Missouri 

 Basin as in previous years. Field investigations totaling 13, of which 

 9 were active in July and August 1965, were focused primarily upon 

 the major enclave of horticultural communities extending along the 

 axis of the Missouri River in the two Dakotas ; however, reconnaissance 

 and excavation parties worked in Iowa, Wyoming, and elsewhere 

 in North Dakota as well. 



1. The Sommers site, upper Big Bend Reservoir, South Dakota, 

 continuing investigations begun in 1964 at what is perhaps the largest 

 of the early villages in the Middle Missouri area. In addition to the 

 clearing of several deeply buried houses, the 1 965 excavations demon- 

 strated that at least part of the village was defended by a deep ditch 

 or dry moat. 



2. The Cattle Oiler site, a small, isolated village in the upper Big 

 Bend Reservoir where for the first time evidence was found of con- 

 temporary or closely subsequent occupations by peoples of the Initial 

 Middle Missouri and Extended Middle Missouri Traditions. 



3. The Ketchen site, just downstream from the Cattle Oiler village 

 appears to have been occupied by peoples of the Middle Missouri 

 Tradition. Although architectural features are abundant, other evi- 

 dences suggest that the occupation was of short duration, or possibly, 

 that the village was never completed. 



4. The eastern shore of the upper Big Bend Reservoir just down- 

 stream from Pierre, South Dakota, where five sites were tested. For 

 the most part, architectural remains were few and indeterminate; 

 however, enough evidence was found to indicate that the principal 

 occupations fell within the generic "La Roche" category. 



5. The Thomas Riggs site, in the Oahe Reservoir just upstream 

 from Pierre, South Dakota. Prior investigators had concluded that 

 the village was unfortified; however, aerial photographs suggested the 

 presence of a complex, bastioned defensive perimeter. Test excava- 

 tions using heavy earth-moving machinery proved the existence of a 

 moat and palisade and indicated that further, intensive work is 

 necessary. 




88 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



6. The Fort Manuel site, in the upper Oahe Reservoir of north- 

 central South Dakota, an important but short-lived trading establish- 

 ment of 1812-1813. 



7. The Medicine Crow site, near Fort Thompson in the lower 

 Big Bend Reservoir where a renewed excavation exposed a fire hearth 

 attributable to the early preceramic occupations. 



8. The Fort Yates area, upper Oahe Reservoir, south-central 

 North Dakota, excavating at the Ben Standing Soldier and Battle 

 Greek Sites where remains of the Extended Middle Missouri Horizon 

 ("Archaic Mandan") were found. In addition, tests at the Porcupine 

 Creek Site produced good evidence of the early period of settlement 

 on the Standing Rock Reservation. 



9. The Arpan site, in the middle Oahe Reservoir near Mobridge, 

 South Dakota, where a low mound was excavated that contained sec- 

 ondary human burials within a sub-floor pit. The remains were 

 culturally related to others in the immediate vicinity and are assumed 

 to date within a few years of A.D. 1200. 



10. The Stelzer site, a Plains Woodland camp area near the Arpan 

 Mounds that has produced significant Plains Woodland remains in the 

 past. Continued excavations here added no new evidence, however, 

 remains of early-day "homesteader" activities were found. 



1 1 . Some 47 sites were recorded in reservoir and canal rights of 

 way within the Garrison Diversion Project of eastern North Dakota. 

 At least 12 of these, including mound groups and Woodland camps 

 seem to be important enough to warrant continued investigation. 



12. A number of sites were found during a reconnaissance of the 

 Bowman-Haley Reservoir on the upper Grand River in southwestern- 

 most North Dakota. Two camp areas, both of McKean affiliation, 

 will require intensive excavation. 



13. A brief shoreline survey of the Angostura Reservoir, south- 

 western South Dakota, assessed the effects of bank erosion. 



In June of 1966, 6 additional parties began field investigations as 

 follows: 



1. Additional work at the Sommers site to trace the defensive 

 ditch discovered during previous excavations. 



2. Continued excavation at the Cattle Oiler and Ketchen villages 

 in order to establish relationships between the sites and to clarify the 

 sequence of occupation. 



3. The Durkin site, a large, early village in the Big Bend Reservoir 

 that is assumed to be important to the interpretation of the adjacent 

 Sommers Site. 



4. The lower Cannonball site, a large village in the upper Oahe 

 Reservoir that seems to mark a crucial point in the putative transition 

 from the Extended to the Terminal Middle Missouri Horizon. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ANTHROPOLOGY 89 



5. Excavation of one or more sites of McKean affiliation within the 

 Bowman-Haley Reservoir. 



6. Mummy Cave, near Cody, Wyoming, where a combined 

 Whitney Gallery of Western Art-National Geographic Society- 

 Smithsonian Institution party was excavating deep deposits containing 

 a long sequence of human occupation. 



In addition to the field parties of the River Basin Surveys, a number 

 of other institutions worked within the Missouri Basin under coopera- 

 tive agreement with the U.S. National Park Service. At the beginning 

 of the year, the cooperators included: the University of Missouri, the 

 University of Kansas, the Kansas State Historical Society, the State 

 Historical Society of North Dakota, and the University of Nebraska. 

 At the end of the fiscal year, cooperative agreements had been con- 

 cluded with four institutions for investigations within the Basin: the 

 University of Missouri, excavating in the Stockton and Kaysinger 

 Bluff reservoirs of Missouri; the State Historical Society of North 

 Dakota in the Oahe Reservoir of North Dakota; the University of 

 Kansas, excavating in the Clinton Reservoir, northeast Kansas; and 

 the University of Nebraska in the Glen Elder Reservoir, north-central 

 Kansas. 



New Programs 



Towards the end of the fiscal year, the Smithsonian Office of An- 

 thropology was engaged in preliminary planning for several major 

 new research programs under the stimulus of Professor Sol Tax, of the 

 University of Chicago, who on January 1, 1966, was appointed special 

 advisor on anthropology to the Security of the Smithsonian Institution. 



As part of a substantial long-range research program of the Office 

 of Anthropology on ancient technology, Precolumbian metal artifacts 

 excavated from the Milagro Culture of Ecuador by Evans and Meggers 

 in 1961 have been submitted to the Battelle Memorial Institute of 

 Columbus, Ohio, for metallographic and spectrochemical studies. 

 The reports received to date are so significant that the study is being 

 broadened for the next several years to include the testing of artifacts 

 from both New and Old World archeological cultures such as Arabia. 

 Field research to rescue data on traditional crafts ahead of the rapidly 

 changing cultures brought on by western industrialization is being 

 organized in such areas as Iran and will be extended to other parts 

 of the world. 



In April 1965, the Office of Anthropology decided to begin work 

 towards a multi-volume "Handbook of North American Indians" to 

 update the encyclopedic Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico 

 (Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 30, 2 vols., 1907-1910), which 

 has been the most widely useful of the 200 Bulletins and 48 large Annual 




90 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Reports of the Bureau. William C. Sturtevant agreed to serve as editor 

 of this new Handbook, and planning as to its content and format began. 

 The aim is to produce a reference work for scholars and the interested 

 public, which will summarize and systematize anthropological and 

 historical knowledge of the cultures, languages, and physical form of 

 the Indians north of Mexico, and outline the course and results of 

 their relationships with the later European and African settlers of the 

 continent. 



VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



Research activities in the division of fishes included a broad range of 

 studies by the staff and the approximately 160 visiting investigators 

 who came to the division to consult with the staff on their research 

 projects and to study the extensive fish collections. 



Ernest A. Lachner's studies of eastern North American barbeled 

 nest-building chubs (Cyprinidae) have resulted in a comprehensive 

 synthesis of their systematics, morphology, and distribution. His field 

 studies contributed to the understanding of the biology and biogeog- 

 raphy of the species and species groups. His ichthyological data have 

 been correlated with the geology and physiography of the area, resulting 

 in a comprehensive summary of the origins of the upland freshwater 

 fish fauna of the eastern United States. 



The systematic studies by Robert H. Gibbs, Jr., with Bruce Collette, 

 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, of the giant-sized tunas of the world 

 will have broad application in the fishery industry, and will be used by 

 the industry and by fishery management organizations in many 

 countries of the world where a* tuna fishery is part of the economic 

 income of the nation. It is the first real analysis of the specific identity 

 of the several populations found in the oceans of the world. 



William A. Gosline, Professor of Zoology, University of Hawaii, 

 was appointed senior postdoctoral research associate for the year 

 beginning September 1965. The subject of his investigation was the 

 arrangement and classification of the major groups of the order Perci- 

 formes, which with several thousand species, is the largest single order 

 of living fishes. His approach to the problem is primarily through 

 comparative osteology. 



Victor G. Springer completed a revision of the circumtropical 

 blennioid fish genus Entomacrodns. One of the few intensive studies of 

 tropical marine shore fishes, this research has resulted in a broader 

 concept of fish speciation, distribution, origin, and evolution than has 

 existed heretofore. A major advance in the zoogeography of this 




Many surviving village sites along the Big Bend Reservoir are in danger of 

 destruction. Much of the Catde Oiler Site here (see p. 87) has already 

 collapsed into the lake. Below: Remains of defensive stockade at Fort 

 Manuel (see p. 88), a fur-trade post of 1812-13 in the central Oahe Reservoir, 

 north-central South Dakota. 




Collecting macaroni penguins on Elephant Island, off the Antarctic Peninsula 

 (see p. 92), are Smithsonian scientists George Watson and J. P. Angle. The 

 site is that where Shackleton's party wintered during his 1914-16 expedition. 

 Below: Robert H. Gibbs, Jr., dissecting a marlin during cruise 14 of RV 

 Anton Brun in the Southeast Pacific (see p. 90). 



\ 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 91 



area has resulted. He is continuing his studies of the osteology, 

 phylogeny, and relationships of the Blenniidae. 



Stanley H. Weitzman's osteological studies of numerous families and 

 groups of fishes contributed to a recent classification of fishes, pub- 

 lished in 1966, which he wrote in collaboration with P. H. Greenwood, 

 D. E. Rosen, and G. S. Myers. This classification collates for the 

 first time in many years the abundant nomenclature of the higher 

 categories of fishes and presents tentative phyletic arrangements of 

 families and orders. 



A new service to the science of herpetology was inaugurated in the 

 division of reptiles and amphibians with the appearance of the first 

 issues of the Smithsonian Herpetological Information Services. These 

 are intended to provide multilithed copies of translations, indexes, 

 bibliographies, lists, and similar material for distribution to herpeto- 

 logical laboratories. It is common for an investigator to prepare as 

 a useful adjunct to his own work an index or translation which would 

 be equally useful to his colleagues if available but is generally not 

 suitable for formal publication. This is the type of material which 

 the Information Services distribute, and the scope of the project is 

 indicated by the items currently available: 



A list of the herpetological publications of the United States National 

 Museum, 1853-1965. 12 pp., issued December 10, 1965. 



On the biology of the giant Indonesian monitor lizard; by Darevsky 

 and Kadarsan [translated from the Russian]. 6 pp., issued Decem- 

 ber 10, 1965. 



A list of institutions offering course work and degree programs in 

 herpetology. 9 pp., issued December 18, 1965. 



Considerations concerning the variability of amphibians and reptiles, 

 by Stugren [translated from the Rumanian]. 10 pp., issued May 6, 

 1966. 



Curator Doris M. Cochran and her collaborator Coleman J. Goin 

 submitted for publication their monograph on the frogs of Colombia. 

 In this study, 27 new species and subspecies of frogs are described. 



James A. Peters pursued his long-term work on Ecuador, with 

 current emphasis on the zoogeographical and taxonomic problems 

 of the fauna of the higher altitudes of the Amazonian slopes of the 

 Andes. He spent October on the coastal plain investigating the 

 transition zone between the dry, almost desert conditions of south- 

 western Ecuador, which lie under the influence of the Humboldt 

 Current, and the dense tropical rain forests of northwestern Ecuador, 

 which show greatest relationships with the Caribbean slopes of Central 

 America. Work was begun on a list of the snakes of the family 

 Typhlopidae for Das Tierreich, to be included in the Liste der rezenten 




92 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Amphibien und Reptilien. An annotated list of rare and endangered 

 species of reptiles and amphibians in the United States was prepared 

 for the Department of the Interior's "Redbook," written by the Com- 

 mittee on Rare and Endangered Species, of which Peters is a member. 



Curator George E. Watson continued work with J. P. Angle on an 

 identification manual of Antarctic birds, participating in a joint 

 U.S. Antarctic Research Program oceanographic research cruise 

 on USCGC Eastwind to the Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetland 

 and South Orkney Islands, from the end of December until early 

 March. He also continued research on the birds of Greece, visiting 

 seabird colonies throughout the Aegean islands, under the sponsorship 

 of the National Geographic Society. 



Paul Slud concluded his field work in Costa Rica, where he collabo- 

 rated with an ecological team working on a project sponsored by the 

 Army Research Office. During the dry season, Slud conducted a 

 survey of birds and environments on Barro Colorado Island, Canal 

 Zone, and at the Area de Pesquisas Ecologicas do Guama, Belem, 

 Brazil. 



Richard L. Zusi, continuing his studies of functional anatomy, 

 locomotion, and feeding behavior in shorebirds by means of laboratory 

 and field studies, obtained 1,300 feet of motion picture film of feeding 

 shorebirds in California, including species of the rocky coast, mud 

 flats, and ocean beach, to be analyzed by stop-motion projector. He 

 studied the definition and interaction of functional complexes of the 

 skull and the skeletal proportions of the trunk and limbs. He found 

 that variations of the neck, wing, and pectoral girdle proved useful in 

 the classification of plovers. As an outgrowth of the work on shorebirds 

 he began a functional analysis of the schizorhinal skull in diverse 

 orders of birds. With David Bridge, he obtained data at Assateague 

 Island, Maryland, for a study of the unique pupillary mechanism of 

 the black skimmer. 



Charles La Rue, a Smithsonian pre-doctoral intern and graduate 

 student from the University of Maryland, under Zusi's direction 

 worked on a functional-anatomical study of the head in certain Ci- 

 coniiformes, with emphasis on variations in functional complexes. 

 Useful in these anatomical studies are the newly installed X-ray 

 machine and darkroom facilities of the division of birds. 



As honorary curator of North American birds, Lester L. Short, Jr., 

 continued his research on hybridization and intergradation in birds 

 of the Great Plains. New material for these investigations totalled 

 800 specimens taken in Nebraska during summer 1965. He continued 

 investigations of hybridization among three ecologically and morpho- 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 93 



logically divergent species of southwestern North American wood- 

 peckers (Dendrocopos) and described other interesting hybrids. Fossil 

 (Tertiary) hawk and stork bones from Nebraska were studied, and a 

 new genus and species of stork were described. Work progressed on a 

 zoogeographical analysis of North American birds, being conducted 

 jointly with Ernst Mayr of Harvard University, and on a review of 

 woodpeckers of the world, the latter in cooperation with Walter J. 

 Bock of Columbia University. 



The first volume of Alexander Wetmore's Birds of Panama was 

 issued in December. Dr. Wetmore conducted field work in south- 

 western Chiriqui (Panama) from January until March. 



S. Dillon Ripley continued to work closely with his associate Salim 

 Ali on the "Handbook of Indian Birds," to be published in India. The 

 first volume has been completed and is scheduled to appear in late 

 1966. The publication of this and subsequent volumes represents a 

 long cherished desire on the part of both authors to bring up to date 

 information on the bird fauna of India, Pakistan, Ceylon, and Nepal, 

 and related islands and small territories and countries such as Sikkim 

 and Bhutan. Ripley also continued his work on a projected mono- 

 graph of the rails of the world, and completed, with research assistant 

 Gorman M. Bond, a study of the birds of Socotra and Abd-el-Kuri. 



As part of the mammals of Panama project, directed by Charles O. 

 Handley, Jr., systematic collections were made at opposite extremes of 

 the Pacific coast of the Republic, near Jaque and near Puerto Armu- 

 ellas, by Francis M. Greenwell and Theodore H. Fleming. Fleming 

 stayed on in Panama to conduct an all-seasons study, supported in part 

 by the National Science Foundation, of mammalian population 

 dynamics. 



During the first year of the Smithsonian Venezuelan project, also 

 under the direction of Charles O. Handley, Jr., about 8,000 specimens 

 of mammals, their associated ectoparasites, and a large body of 

 ecological and biological data for each were collected. In cooperation 

 with Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas (IVIC) and 

 Middle American Research Unit (MARU), collection of blood sera 

 to establish a virus antibody profile for the wild mammal population 

 was begun. Altogether 20 scientists (parasitologists, virologists, mam- 

 malogists, and ecologists) in 5 countries are participating in this project, 

 which enjoys the support of the Consejo de Bienestar Rural, the Museo 

 de Ciencias Naturales, and Universidad Central de Venezuela, in 

 Caracas. It is financed by the Office of the Surgeon General, Depart- 

 ment of the Army. 



Also with the support of the Office of the Surgeon General, Henry 

 W. Setzer's studies of the mammals and their ectoparasites in the 




94 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



African fauna continued in the southern part of the continent, particu- 

 larly in the Bechuanaland Protectorate and South-West Africa, and 

 they were extended to Nigeria and Senegal in West Africa. A pre- 

 liminary synopsis of the Hyracoidea, by J. Bothnia, was issued as the 

 first part in a projected identification manual for African mammals, 

 being prepared under the direction of J. Meester, University of 

 Pretoria. 



Steps were taken in the division of mammals toward development of 

 a center for study and identification of subhuman primates. Particu- 

 larly significant was a conference of prominent primatologists that 

 considered the Smithsonian's assets and potential in this field and 

 produced a plan for development of a center. 



Through the support of Helmut K. Buechner, Office of Ecology, the 

 department of vertebrate zoology in January 1966 participated in the 

 establishment of the Area de Pesquisas Ecologicas do Guama (APEG), 

 Bel em, Brazil. The APEG was established through a series of official 

 announcements by Director Jose Maria Gonduru, of the Instituto de 

 Pesquisas e Experimentacao Agropecuarias do Norte (IPEAN). One 

 of the primary objectives of the APEG is the establishment of a broad 

 program of basic research on the ecology of the Amazonian forest, 

 one which will also serve as a means of offering scientific training 

 directly related to regional needs. Both the Smithsonian and the 

 IPEAN are collaborating in the development of a scientific program 

 for the APEG through the provision of grants from the Smithsonian 

 and facilities, personnel, and equipment from the IPEAN. As a result 

 of this support, research programs are already under way on soils, 

 botany, entomology, and epidemiology. 



Several members of the department of vertebrate zoology have 

 already participated in the research program of the APEG. In August 

 1965 Handley made a significant collection of bats in the APEG 

 bringing the known bat fauna of the Bel em area to a record total of 

 over 60 species. He also gathered data on the vertical distribution of 

 the bat fauna in the tropical forest making use of canopy mist nets. 



Philip S. Humphrey, in collaboration with the Belem Virus Labora- 

 tory and supported by the Rockefeller Foundation, continued his 

 studies on the ecological distribution and epidemiology of birds in the 

 APEG. His field work was made enormously productive through the 

 enthusiastic assistance of Thomas Lovejoy, David Soleau, and Stephen 

 Humphrey. The emphasis of the summer's field work was on intensive 

 banding of tropical forest birds, an approach never before attempted 

 in the Amazon res-ion. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 95 



INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



On July 1, 1965, three new divisions — of Crustacea, of echinoderms, 

 and of worms — were formed from the old division of marine inverte- 

 brates and were joined with the existing division of mollusks to form 

 the department of invertebrate zoology. It is one of the largest 

 departments of its kind in the world with specialists in many of the 

 groups of invertebrate animals. Staff members concentrate primarily 

 on basic research in systematics, and their interests include classical tax- 

 onomy, embryology, population dynamics, ecology, and oceanography. 



Raymond B. Manning concluded a monographic study on the 

 stomatopod Crustacea of the western Atlantic. He also furthered his 

 studies on decapod Crustacea during field and study trips to Dominica, 

 the Institute of Marine Science, University of Miami, and to the 

 Rijksmuseum van Natuurlijke Historie, Leiden, Netherlands. J. 

 Laurens Barnard completed an illustrated handbook for the identifi- 

 cation of families and genera of marine gammaridean amphipods. In 

 addition he continued studies on the abyssal and bathyal antarctic 

 amphipods. 



The origin of cave faunas is a fascinating study for the systematist 

 because it so often divulges what appear to be direct evidences of 

 evolutionary processes upon animals. Thomas E. Bowman completed 

 three reports on cave isopods from Mexico and Cuba. 



John C. McCain carried out studies on caprellid amphipods of the 

 southeastern United States. To supplement existing study material, 

 McCain made collections at several localities in the northern Gulf of 

 Mexico. In addition he completed a manuscript on a new deep-water 

 genus and species of caprellid from the eastern Pacific. 



Louis S. Kornicker conducted research on the taxonomy and distri- 

 bution of the myodocopid ostracods of the Atlantic Shelf, the Bay of 

 Naples, and the Red Sea, and he studied collections at the British 

 Museum, London, and the Naples Zoological Station. 



David L. Pawson completed studies on the bathyal holothurians and 

 other echinoderms of the New Zealand-Australian region. He and 

 Donald F. Squires participated in an expedition to the Antarctic 

 Peninsula, during which large collections of invertebrates were ob- 

 tained. Earlier in the year, Pawson studied holothurian and echinoid 

 specimens in European museums. 



With the assistance of Joseph C. Britton, Joseph Rosewater completed 

 a catalog of the more than 500 species of mollusks collected during 

 Cruise "A" of the International Indian Ocean Expedition. Rosewater 



230-457—66- 




96 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



continued studies on the littorinid snails of the Indo-Pacific region, 

 and the periplomatid clams of the western Atlantic. 



Joseph P. E. Morrison continued his research on brackish-water 

 mollusks of the world and on the hydrobiid snails of American waters. 

 He carried out field work in Dominica, Antigua, Montserrat, and 

 Guadeloupe in an attempt to determine which of the mollusk species 

 are endemic and which had been dispersed by artificial means. 



Studies on the composition and relationships of the Polynesian 

 molluscan fauna were continued by Harald A. Rehder who completed 

 for publication a number of reports on his research. He made progress 

 on his monographic study of the gastropod family Harpidae, and in 

 connection with his interest in Indo-Pacific mollusks examined museum 

 collections in Europe. 



Meredith L. Jones carried out field work in the tropical western 

 Atlantic in search of the marine polychaetous annelids upon which 

 his systematic work is focused. He participated in an expedition to 

 the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea; he was joined by T. Peter Lowe 

 in making collections on Santa Catarina Island, Brazil; and he also 

 acted as scientific leader of an expedition to Andros Island, Bahamas, 

 sponsored by H. J. Bowen, of Wilmington, Delaware. Jones also 

 continued his monographic study of the magelonid polychaetes of the 

 world. 



Studies on the fauna of northern waters were continued by Marian 

 H. Pettibone, who specializes in the systematics of polychaete worms 

 of the New England region. Her work continues on a revision of 

 genera of polynoid polychaetes and on deep-water collections made by 

 the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries off the mouth of the Columbia 

 River, Oregon. 



In addition to administering the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian 

 Biological Survey of Dominica, Horton H. Hobbs, Jr., continued 

 his monographic work on the freshwater crayfishes and their associated 

 entocytherid ostracods. He engaged in field studies on Dominica, 

 and also collected decapod Crustacea during a field trip through 

 southeastern Virginia, South Carolina, and Georgia. During part of 

 the year Hobbs examined crayfish collections in a number of European 

 museums. 



The classification of collections of freshwater and terrestrial decapod 

 crustaceans from Dominica was the object of a collaborative study by 

 Hobbs and Fenner A. Chace, Jr. In addition, Chace began prelimi- 

 nary work on the marine caridean shrimps collected by the Bredin- 

 Smithsonian expeditions to the Caribbean in 1956, 1957, 1959, and 

 1960. 




*" ' ^^r^ 



Aboard the RV Anton Brim off the coast of Chile, curator Roger F. Cressey 

 (foreground) aids in the capture of a shark from which he will remove the 

 parasitic copepods as a part of his studies on host-parasite relationships 

 (see p. 97). Below: Photographed by curator Klaus Rutzler, a diver 

 collects sponge specimens at a depth of 120 feet from the coral reef slope of 

 northern Jamaica during the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian survey of 

 Dominica. The specimens are being studied by Rutzler. 




Ernst Kirsteuer, from the American Museum of Natural History, examines 

 pieces of coral rock for its microfauna as a participant in the Bredin-Archbold- 

 Smithsonian biological survey of Dominica, Lesser Antilles. Below: Cata- 

 loguer in the division of Crustacea typing labels on an SCM typewriter 

 assembly which produces a master tape from which any number of individual 

 specimen labels may be prepared. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 97 



An interesting facet of evolutionary biology concerns the systematic 

 problems arising from parasite-host relationships and the interpretation 

 of host specificity. Roger F. Cressey, who is studying the copepods 

 parasitic on fishes, has found indications that where host specificity 

 occurs, it may provide new information relating to the phylogeny of 

 the fish host. In carrying out his studies during the past year he 

 participated in three expeditions, to the Gulf of Mexico and to the 

 southeastern Pacific, during which sharks, tunas, and billfishes were 

 examined for parasitic copepods. Cressey completed a revision of the 

 Pandaridae, a family of copepods parasitic on sharks. 



Studies on community structure of animal populations were carried 

 out by Thomas E. Bowman, involving distribution of planktonic 

 marine Crustacea. J. Laurens Barnard was engaged in a study of the 

 benthic fauna of Bahia de San Quintin, Baja California; and Mere- 

 dith L. Jones is completing an analysis of a community of benthic 

 invertebrates from San Francisco Bay, California. 



Donald F. Squires, former chairman of the department and now 

 Deputy Director of the Museum of Natural History, continued his 

 research on solitary corals. While on shipboard during the recent 

 expedition to Antarctica, he made observations on living deep sea 

 corals and he succeeded in returning several of the living corals by 

 air to Washington for further study. 



W. Duane Hope has continued a monographic study of the freeliving 

 marine nematode genera Deontostoma, Thoracostoma and Pseudocella. 

 In winter 1965 he completed the field work for a study of seasonal 

 changes in the populations of marine nematodes in Hadley Harbor, 

 Massachusetts, and a survey of the marine nematodes for the Cape 

 Cod area. 



Klaus Rutzler, who came from Austria to join the division of echino- 

 derms in fall 1965, has gained, through wide field experience, an under- 

 standing of the ecology as well as the systematics of Porifera, for 

 ecology is often the key to classification of sponges. Since his arrival 

 he has continued investigations on Caribbean and Adriatic sponges, 

 and during the first half of 1966 carried out an ecological survey of the 

 marine sponges of Jamaica and Dominica. 



Mary E. Rice has conducted a comparative study of the repro- 

 ductive biology and development of three species of sipunculids from 

 the San Juan Archipelago in the State of Washington. In addition she 

 continued her study of the taxonomy of sipunculids collected from 

 the Maldive Islands in the Indian Ocean. 



Honorary research associates of the divisions contributed sub- 

 stantially to the furtherance of research in their several disciplines. 

 Waldo L. Schmitt carried out a monographic study of the pinnotherid 




98 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



crabs and began compilation of the field notes covering his extensive 

 collecting trips in the past, aided by his former secretary, Lucile 

 McCain. Mildred S. Wilson continued her studies on the diaptomid 

 copepods, which ultimately will lead to a revision of the North Ameri- 

 can species. Ailsa M. Clark proceeded with her work on the shallow- 

 water Indo-West-Pacific echinoderm fauna, and Elizabeth Deichmann 

 completed a study of collections of holothurians from the Gulf of 

 Guinea and continued her studies on the sea cucumbers of Florida 

 and the West Indies. Roman Kenk studied the systematics, life 

 cycles, and distribution of freshwater planarian flatworms. He has 

 established a series of laboratory cultures which allow him to observe 

 food habits, reproduction, and the behavior of planarians. Gilbert 

 L. Voss, University of Miami, continued his research on the Cephalo- 

 poda of the Atlantic. 



Supported by a Guggenheim Fellowship, Dr. Jayme de Loyola e 

 Silva, Universidad do Parana, Curitiba, Brazil, was in residence in 

 the division of Crustacea studying the collections of sphaeromatid 

 isopods. NAS-NRC visiting research associate F. J. S. Maturo, 

 from the University of Florida, continued his systematic studies in the 

 division of echinoderms on the bryozoans of the Atlantic continental 

 shelf in general, and of the southeast coast of the United States in 

 particular. Also, during the past year, Dr. I. Canet was in residence 

 in the division of Crustacea. She has nearly completed a revision of 

 the economically important western Atlantic species of penaeid shrimps. 



This year an histology laboratory was established under the re- 

 sponsibility of the division of worms to serve the needs of staff members. 

 Equipment, supplies, and technical assistance are now available for 

 making routine histological preparations for light microscopy. 



Under agreements reached with a number of universities making 

 it possible for graduate students to carry on research projects in the 

 department of invertebrate zoology, seven students were associated 

 with the department under the guidance of five staff members. 



ENTOMOLOGY 



Oscar L. Cartwright continued his research on the Scarab beetle 

 family Scarabaeidae, especially the Aphodiinae. Many hundreds of 

 additional specimens of Ataenius including additional types have been 

 studied. A revision of two allied genera, Euparixia and R/iyparus, also 

 received some attention. Cartwright participated in the Smith- 

 sonian-H. J. Bowen expedition to Andros Island in the Bahamas, 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ENTOMOLOGY 99 



obtaining undescribed species in several orders of insects as well as 

 new distributional records for many other species. He also collected 

 winter and early vernal forms of Aphodiinae in several areas along the 

 Gulf Coast in Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi. 



Paul J. Spangler actively continued his research on several families 

 of water beetles. Identifications and ecological data for an additional 

 3,800 specimens were added to his monograph of the hydrophilid genus 

 Tropisternus. A manuscript on the Haliplidae of Mexico and Central 

 America was advanced by the preparation of about 500 specimens for 

 critical study and the completion of 38 illustrations. The study of a 

 collection of Hydrophilidae from southern Argentina was undertaken 

 at the request of the Hungarian National Museum; another study, on 

 the water beetles of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, was 

 begun; and a revision of the hydrophilid genus Enochrus from Mexico, 

 Central America, and the West Indies was undertaken as a joint 

 project with Ralph Gunderson. These and other taxonomic studies 

 were forwarded by 2 months of museum study in England, Belgium 

 and France, and by 12 weeks in Mexico and Central America, where 

 99,100 insects and 1,375 miscellaneous specimens, including 46,200 

 water beetles for his various research projects, were collected. His 

 field work was completed by 10 days of collecting in the Virgin Islands 

 to obtain material for one research project. 



Research associate Doris H. Blake continued work on her review 

 of the chrysomelid beetle genus Glyptoscelis of the Western Hemisphere. 

 Mrs. Blake collected for 10 days in Puerto Rico. 



Much of Richard C. Froeschner's research time was devoted to the 

 completion or continuation of several projects begun by the late re- 

 search associate Carl J. Drake: two papers have been submitted for 

 publication with Drake's name as sole author; a paper on the Gala- 

 pagos lacebugs was rewritten and will be submitted with Froeschner 

 as coauthor; and some work was done on an important revisionary 

 study of the American lacebug genus Corythuca, on which Drake had 

 made only some preliminary plans. Froeschner completed a paper on 

 the burrower bugs (Cydnidae) collected by the Danish Noona Dan 

 expedition to the Philippines and New Guinea. He also commenced 

 work on an illustrated manual of the known genera of lacebugs as a 

 complementary volume to the Drake and Ruhoff Lacebugs of the World, 

 a Catalog (U.S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 243, 1965); it will be based on Drake's 

 remarkably complete collection of lacebugs. Sorting, preliminary 

 examination, and determination was begun of some of the hemipterous 

 insects collected on the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological Sur- 




100 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



vey of Dominica; preparation of actual reports will be started after 

 the survey teams complete their activities in 1966. 



Karl V. Krombein began a revisionary study of a new Oriental genus 

 of myzinine wasp which is parasitic on cerambycid larvae boring in 

 trees. He received proofs of a large volume on the biology, nest 

 architecture, and associates of trap-nesting wasps and bees, and also 

 of his section in the second supplement to the Hymenoptera of America 

 North of Mexico, of which he is also co-editor. 



Research associate Carl F. W. Muesebeck completed a manuscript 

 describing two new reared species of the diapriid genus Trichopria. 

 He has also made considerable progress on his revision of the braconid 

 genus Orgilus, an important parasite of caterpillars. 



J. F. Gates Clarke continued his studies of the Meyrick types of 

 Microlepidoptera with preparations for volumes 6, 7 and 8; completion 

 of this monumental contribution is scheduled for 1968. Clarke has 

 also made significant progress on the Microlepidoptera of the Pacific 

 Islands and Neotropical Region. 



Donald R. Davis almost completed the second part (subfamily 

 Incurvariinae) of his revision of the New World Incurvariidae; work 

 was intiated on the third (last) part treating the subfamily Adelinae. 

 Revisionary studies were also begun on the New World Carposinidae, 

 North American Acrolophidae, and North American Tineidae. 

 Davis conducted field work for four months on five major islands of 

 the Philippines, accompanied during the first three months by Julian 

 Jumalon of San Carlos University. Ecological information and ma- 

 terial collected on this trip will form an integral part of Davis' long- 

 term project on Indo-Australian Psychidae. 



W. Donald Duckworth continued his long-term study of the New 

 World Stenomidae by conducting field investigations in Venezuela, 

 Trinidad, Puerto Rico, and Jamaica. He also completed his study of 

 the Amsel types of Venezuelan Stenomidae in Munich, and continued 

 similar studies on stenomid types in Berlin and Vienna. 



William D. Field completed research on a new genus of thecline 

 butterflies, and is preparing a manuscript for publication. He has 

 also continued his investigations on a world revision of the butterfly 

 genus Vanessa, and on the butterflies and larger moths of Dominica. 

 During June, Field made a 10-day field trip into the New England 

 mountains to collect rare and localized species of butterflies. 



Everett D. Cashatt, predoctoral associate, made considerable 

 progress on a revision of the North American moths of the subfamily 

 Chrysauginae. He also prepared a catalog of the Chrysauginae of 

 the world, listing 174 genera and 532 species. Cashatt also completed 

 investigations on the taxonomy and distribution of Oidematophorus 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ENTOMOLOGY 101 



balanotes (Pterophoridae) and initiated studies on the Neotropical 

 chrysaugine genus Hyperparachma. 



The Southeast Asia Mosquito Project (SEAMP), started in 1964 

 as a cooperative endeavor between the Smithsonian and the Depart- 

 ment of the Army and now, in its second year, has in preparation 

 monographic studies on the mosquitoes of the area concerned. SEAMP 

 has issued an informative field manual on the mosquitoes of Vietnam. 



Ralph E. Crabill, Jr., continued research on several projects initiated 

 earlier. Several articles on the dolichocephalic Geophilomorpha 

 were almost completed. Considerable work was done on revisions 

 of the Mecistocephalidae and the genus Strigamia. 



Oliver S. Flint, Jr., continued his studies on the Trichoptera of the 

 New World. In working on new collections from Mexico, Central 

 America, and Chile, he found many species new to the collection as 

 well as many new to science. During the summer Flint collected for 

 two and a half months in Mexico and Guatemala. Later in the year 

 he spent two months collecting in Chile and in the Palmer Peninsula 

 area of the Antarctic; this trip provided much valuable new material 

 as well as first-hand information on the habitats of many exotic species. 



Research associate K. C. Emerson identified large collections of 

 Mallophaga from birds and mammals of Africa and Thailand, and 

 of Anoplura from Africa. 



Research associate Thomas E. Snyder nearly completed the second 

 supplement to his Annotated Subject-Heading Bibliography of Termites; to 

 aid in the publication of this volume he obtained a grant from the 

 National Science Foundation. 



Research associate Robert Traub and several assistants from the 

 University of Maryland School of Medicine have been working on 

 fleas (Siphonaptera) and trombiculid mites on collaborative projects 

 with the Smithsonian, dealing primarily with specimens collected in 

 Pakistan, Iran, and Mexico. The Pakistani material, which raises 

 the number of fleas known from that country from 10 to 67, includes 

 3 genera, 1 subgenus, and 21 species new to science; this constitutes 

 probably the richest single collection of fleas ever made. The need 

 for further research in the field is illustrated by the genus Macrostylo- 

 phora which parasitizes squirrels in South Asia; 16 species have been 

 described to date, but 1 1 new species are at hand mainly from the 

 Philippines and North Borneo. 



In December 1965, J. F. Gates Clarke was appointed senior scientist 

 in recognition of his outstanding contributions to the development 

 of the Department, and Karl V. Krombein transferred from the 

 Department of Agriculture to become the new chairman. 




102 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



BOTANY 



Plant species and populations are often identified today, by joint 

 studies of ecology, cytology, phytochemistry, physiology, and other 

 nontaxonomic disciplines. The overall activities of the department of 

 botany are directed toward such an integrative approach to problems 

 in plant systematics. For example, a comparative study of the philo- 

 dendron family has recently been completed by systematist Dan H. 

 Nicolson and plant anatomist Richard H. Eyde. This horticulturally 

 important, pantropical family is characterized by a peculiar arrange- 

 ment of tiny flowers around a columnar floral stalk which often pro- 

 trudes from the base of a cuplike, expanded, or strapshaped appendage. 

 This appendage, or spathe, may be highly colored, as in the anthuriums 

 of commerce and the jack-in-the-pulpit. The subject of their joint 

 investigation was the anatomical structure of the flowers themselves 

 and its possible bearing upon intrafamilial alignment, since no modern 

 treatment was available. Their work was facilitated by Miss Priscilla 

 Sherwin who, as a participant in the Smithsonian summer research 

 assistant program, prepared the microscope slides upon which the 

 study was based and assisted with the observations. Among other 

 findings, their research showed that the genus Lysichiton was not 

 evolutionary primitive; that the genus Philodendron did not arise from 

 the Pothos subfamily, as advocated by some botanists; and that Acorus 

 (sweet flag), is unique in the family and should probably be segregated 

 and recognized in a new subfamily. These conclusions, which could 

 not have been reached on the basis of the systematic or anatomical 

 evidence alone, demonstrate the value of an interdisciplinary approach 

 to problems in systematic botany. 



Kleinodendron, a new genus in the poinsettia family, was recently 

 described from southern Brazil by Lyman B. Smith. He was anxious 

 to know the closest relatives within this family but his own observations 

 on floral structure and external morphology were insufficient to reach 

 a conclusion. With the collaboration of William L. Stern, the ana- 

 tomical structure of the wood was examined to establish, if possible, the 

 nearest relatives of this Brazilian plant. Investigation and comparative 

 study of related forms indicated that Smith was correct in his tentative 

 interpretation that Kleinodendron could be assigned to the Cluytia tribe 

 of the poinsettia family. 



Phytochemistry is playing an increasingly important role in system- 

 atics. The presence of chemical substances is utilized by Mason E. 

 Hale, along with data on morphology, geographic distribution, and 

 habitat, in the identification and characterization of lichens. In an 

 effort to complete world-wide studies of the important lichen genus 




Mason E. Hale of the depart- 

 ment of botany finds lichens 

 in many habitats (see p. 102), 

 including Japanese rooftops, 

 here near Biwako. Below: 

 Foreign students are shown 

 laboratory of grass anatomy 

 (see p. 103) by T. R. Soder- 

 strom (right) and Dr. Cleofe 

 E. Calderon (far left), visiting 

 Argentinian scientist. At the 

 microscope is former Neigh- 

 borhood Youth Corps girl 

 Diana Newman, who works 

 for Smithsonian research 

 associate. 




Student of Lyman B. Smith holding plant of Tillandsia oerstedii in Costa Rica, 

 where Smith taught course on epiphytes with the Organization for Tropical 

 Studies. Below: Smith's class in the field. Here botany combines with 

 entomology in the study ot orchid pollination. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION BOTANY 103 



Parmelia, Hale during the past year undertook explorations in Hawaii 

 and in western and southeastern United States to supplement previous 

 wide-ranging excursions in southeastern Asia and Japan under the 

 United States-Japan Cooperative Science Program. This research 

 exemplifies a combined chemical, morphological, and field approach to 

 the solution of taxonomic problems in a large genus. 



Chromosome morphology and number in plants of the melastome 

 family are being investigated jointly by John J. Wurdack and col- 

 laborator Peter H. Raven of Stanford University. Kittie F. Parker, 

 honorary research associate, is working with biochemists at the Uni- 

 versity of Texas on a study of chemical variation and taxonomy in 

 Hymenoxys scaposa, a member of the composite family. Thomas R. 

 Soderstrom is combining the taxonomic and anatomic methods in his 

 continuing investigations of the primitive tropical olyroid grasses. His 

 work is being aided by Cleofe E. Calderon who is concentrating on the 

 anatomical phases of the research, while further assistance with studies 

 of leaf epidermises was provided by Jerold Grashoff, a Smithsonian 

 summer research assistant. 



Traditional phases of plant taxonomy continue to receive paramount 

 attention notwithstanding some of the newer lines of research in which 

 botany staff members are involved. Of major importance has been 

 the establishment this year of the Index Nominum Genericorum 

 Project in facilities provided by the department of botany. This 

 project, initiated in 1954 at Utrecht, Netherlands, in association with 

 the headquarters there of the International Association for Plant 

 Taxonomy, has the aim of preparing a comprehensive card catalog of 

 all plant genera which have been validly published according to the 

 "International Code of Botanical Nomenclature." Each card carries 

 the name of the author of the genus, the exact reference to the publica- 

 tion in which the name appeared, and the name of the type species when 

 available. Information on each card is verified by actual examination 

 of the original publication as well as other publications pertinent to 

 the establishment of a type species. This work is carried out insofar 

 as possible by botanical monographers who volunteer their services, 

 but where these are not available, the project staff undertakes to 

 perform the necessary studies. To date 23,000 cards in sets of 1,000 

 have been issued and distributed by subscription to botanical institu- 

 tions throughout the world. The work is directed by botanical 

 bibliographer Ida K. Langman with the assistance of Mary F. South- 

 well. Support is through a grant to the International Association for 

 Plant Taxonomy by the National Science Foundation; botanist 

 Richard S. Cowan, director of the Museum of Natural History, acts as 

 administrator. 




104 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



A conference to explore the feasibility of preparing a flora of North 

 America, sponsored by the American Society of Plant Taxonomists, 

 with Stanwyn G. Shetler as the local representative and organizer, was 

 held during two days in May 1966. The meetings were attended by 

 a select committee of ten botanists from the United States, Canada, 

 and Mexico, as well as by members of the department of botany. The 

 committee recommended that a flora be initiated and that the Smith- 

 sonian Institution act as host institution for the production of the work. 

 Shetler was suggested as secretary of the editorial committee. 



Each year the department is privileged to entertain distinguished 

 visiting botanists who come for counsel, to examine the collections, 

 and to use the library in pursuit of their research. Armando Dugand, 

 Universidad del Atlantico, Barranquilla, Colombia, and Juan V. 

 Pancho, University of the Philippines, College, have spent the year 

 at the National Herbarium under the auspices of the John Simon 

 Guggenheim Memorial Foundation. Dugand's work concerns the 

 systematics and ecology of the flora and vegetation of the arid lands of 

 Colombia bordering the Caribbean Sea. At the same time he is 

 engaged in monographic studies of the catalpa family, in which he 

 needs our extensive holdings in order to make proper comparisons and 

 sound judgments. Pancho is studying the floristics of Mt. Makiling, 

 which stands astride the borders of the provinces of Laguna and 

 Batangas on the Island of Luzon. Several attempts have been made to 

 prepare a flora of this extinct volcano and surrounding countryside, 

 and there exists a manuscript, which is incomplete, prepared in the 

 1920's by an American botanist, the late A. D. E. Elmer. Pancho is 

 checking literature citations, examining critical specimens, and 

 reorganizing Elmer's identification keys for the plants of the region. 



Julian Gonzalez Patino (Hermano Daniel), Rector of the Colegio 

 de San Jose, Medellin, Colombia, with the assistance of a fellowship 

 from the Pan American Union, is studying the medicinal plants of 

 Colombia and the flora of the Departamento de Antioquia. 



John H. Beaman of Michigan State University spent the academic 

 year in residence as a Smithsonian senior postdoctoral fellow continuing 

 his studies on the alpine floras of Central America and Mexico. He 

 is also collaborating with Thomas R. Soderstrom on a monographic 

 treatment of the Central American bromegrasses. It is through 

 assistance to such visiting botanists as these, by providing them with 

 specimens and other facilities, that the department of botany is able to 

 make contributions to science above and beyond the direct research of 

 its own staff. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION PALEOBIOLOGY 105 



PALEOBIOLOGY 



Research by G. Arthur Cooper was devoted largely to preparation 

 of illustrations for his monograph on the Permian of West Texas 

 (Glass Mountains) with Richard E. Grant of the U.S. Geological 

 Survey. All but 17 genera have been photographed for his manu- 

 script, which totals about 4,000 pages. 



With members of the U.S. Geological Survey, Cooper made much- 

 needed collections from significant Ordovician localities in Utah and 

 Nevada in an effort to determine the age and correlation of some 

 poorly known formations. In May and early June, aided by Thomas 

 Phelan, Cooper carried on a field investigation of the Cedar Valley 

 and related Devonian formations of Iowa and Missouri. The purpose 

 of this trip was to collect fossils and data for a study on the correlation 

 of the Cedar Valley, for presentation at a 1968 symposium on the 

 Devonian, to be held in Calgary, Canada. 



Research on various elements of the Lower Devonian fossil flora of 

 eastern Canada by Francis M. Hueber has been delayed for want 

 of laboratory facilities in the new quarters of the division of paleo- 

 botany in the west wing of the Natural History Museum. On the other 

 hand, some progress was made in the research project through addi- 

 tional fieldwork. Important petrifactions of plant material from 

 northern New Brunswick and the Gaspe Bay area of Quebec, Canada, 

 were obtained during a 2%-week collecting trip. During another 2 

 weeks of fieldwork, fossil plant material for comparison with the 

 Canadian fossil flora were obtained from Lower Devonian sediments 

 at Beartooth Butte and Cottonwood Canyon, Wyoming. 



Investigation of the crustose corralline algae of the North Atlantic 

 was continued by Walter H. Adey through use of the vessel Phykos, 

 received from the Navy reserve fleet and remodeled for the coralline 

 program. Collections were made aiong the shelf areas extending from 

 Long Island Sound south to the Florida Keys. The Phykos was found 

 to be well suited to the task, for it provided space and stability not 

 available on the smaller vessels used earlier. The specimens obtained 

 during the summer of 1965 form a nucleus collection for the south- 

 eastern North Atlantic. Collections were made during February 

 from land-supported stations along the coast of Jamaica at the invita- 

 tion of Thomas Goreau, University of the West Indies. 



As a part of a more general investigation of the early Tertiary 

 mammals of North America, C. Lewis Gazin has continued his detailed 

 study of the morphology, systematics, and environment of the Eocene 

 condylarthran mammal Hyopsodus, a companion piece to his earlier 




106 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



study of the coordinal, and in part contemporary, Meniscotherium. A 

 study trip to the Carnegie Museum in April permitted him to extend 

 his statistical analysis of speciation in Hyopsodus to the upper Eocene 

 and to an important middle Eocene occurrence in the Green River 

 formation of Utah. At the request of the Wyoming Geological Associa- 

 tion, Gazin contributed a paper on the early Eocene mammalian faunas 

 related to the Rock Springs uplift for the guidebook to their field con- 

 ference during the latter part of the summer. 



David H. Dunkle concentrated his studies on the poorly known and 

 widely scattered Middle Devonian fish faunas of North America, with 

 emphasis on a better understanding of the "Dinichthys"" tuberculatus- 

 pustulosus complex of coccosteiform arthrodires. Based on new and 

 underscribed specimens in the national collections and other materials 

 generously loaned for study by the Cleveland Museum of Natural 

 History, the University of Michigan Museum of Paleontology, the 

 Ohio University, and Bowling Green State University, a revisionary 

 manuscript on the fishes of the Silica Shale of Ohio is near completion. 



In addition he collaborated with Dr. Habib-ur Rahman, Geological 

 Survey of Pakistan, in a report, in press, concerning the stratigraphy 

 of occurrence of a recently discovered fauna of marine Eocene fishes 

 in the Dera Ghazi Khan District, West Pakistan. 



Nicholas Hotton III has been studying the functional morphology 

 of therapsid reptiles and the field occurrence of reptilian fossils in 

 the Beaufort series (Permo-Triassic, South Africa), in preparation 

 for a systematic revision of the dicynodont reptiles. Approximately 

 100 dicynodont fossil skulls from South Africa were prepared super- 

 ficially during the summer of 1965, with volunteer assistance. About 

 half of these have been tentatively identified. Functional morphologic 

 studies completed since this material was prepared indicate that 

 additional features of palate and jaws must be exposed before the 

 specimens will be useful in the projected taxonomic revision of the 

 group. 



Osteological variation in living lizards is being studied by Hotton 

 from the viewpoint of their taxonomy, which is based on soft parts 

 in these forms. The primary purpose of this study is to establish a 

 model for determination of systematic patterns in the dicynodonts, 

 but, if successful it will also provide information on the relationship 

 between taxa established by neozoological techniques and taxa estab- 

 lished by paleontological techniques. 



Petrographic studies of Beaufort sediments begun by research 

 assistant Ruth O. Hotton, are showing increasing promise as technical 

 problems, due chiefly to induration and fine grain of the material, are 

 solved. About 350 rock samples, collected in 1961 to 1963-64 over an 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION PALEOBIOLOGY 107 



area more than 600 miles long and about 150 miles wide, are being 

 studied. In about 10 percent of the collection, quartz and feldspar 

 percentages have been determined by grain count in thin section, and 

 an extensive heavy-mineral suite, as yet undescribed, has been 

 extracted. 



Clayton E. Ray continued work on Quaternary mammals, in par- 

 ticular on materials from the southeastern United States, Mexico, the, 

 Antilles, and Venezuela. Progress made on his comprehensive study 

 of the fossil musk oxen of North America resulted in two small manu- 

 scripts in press and a third nearing completion. The work of sorting 

 and identification of the Ladds, Georgia, fauna has continued as field 

 parties from Shorter College, Rome, Georgia, continued collecting and 

 shipping materials. One paper resulting from this project, the de- 

 scription of a new, giant chipmunk, was published during the year. 



Ray spent approximately two months in Mexico during the latter part 

 of the year, doing fieldwork and examining museum collections. The 

 field work, in collaboration with personnel of the Peabody Museum of 

 Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, is concentrated in 

 late Pleistocene deposits of the Puebla Valley where the faunas are 

 associated with early man. In June intensive fieldwork was begun at 

 Saltville, Virginia, in collaboration with Virginia Polytechnic Institute. 



Research associate Remington Kellogg continued his study of the 

 extinct whalebone whales, particularly those occurring in the Miocene 

 Calvert, Choptank, and St. Marys formations of Maryland and Vir- 

 ginia. Progress was made on the allocation to better preserved speci- 

 mens of the unsatisfactory fossil mysticete vertebrae and mandibles 

 which served as types for the genera and species proposed by E. D. 

 Cope. A description was completed of a previously unknown large 

 odontocete from the Calvert formation of Maryland. 



Richard S. Boardman was charged with the organization and part 

 authorship of a complete revision, for the Treatise of Invertebrate Paleon- 

 tology, of the volume on Bryozoa, which will deal with the entire 

 phylum down to the genus level, averaging a plate of illustrations per 

 genus. At present, nine scientists from this country and Western 

 Europe are contributing to this large undertaking. 



The identification and use of bryozoan fragments in subsurface well 

 cuttings in oil exploration was the subject of an investigation by Board- 

 man and Jesse Merida, a graduate student at George Washington 

 University. The fragments are generally identifiable and should prove 

 useful in future exploration for oil. Boardman also, as a part of a 

 training program established between the Smithsonian Institution and 

 the Geology Department of Yale University, gave three lectures at 

 New Haven this year. 



230-457—66 10 




108 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



The study of Recent and Pleistocene podocopid ostracodes by 

 Richard H. Benson continued as a new laboratory including the most 

 advanced photomicrographic equipment was being completed. A 

 general examination of the history and present status of research on 

 the living marine descendants of this important fossil group was com- 

 pleted early in the year and submitted for publication. Two studies 

 concerned with the stratigraphic and ecologic aspects of the Pleistocene 

 freshwater ostracodes of Texas and Kansas were also completed. One 

 of these examined the feasibility of using muscle-scar patterns for 

 classification, and developed a simple quantitative method for com- 

 parison of the relative position of individual scars among different taxa. 

 A fourth area of study concerned the description and biogeographic 

 evaluation of the ostracodes of the Indian Ocean collected by Benson 

 and others during the International Indian Ocean Expedition. He 

 and his associate Rosalie Maddocks, who made extensive collections 

 in Madagascar before coming to the Smithsonian on temporary 

 appointment, have been documenting many new species from a portion 

 of the world's ostracode faunas previously unknown. A new technique 

 for removing fossil ostracodes from abyssal muds yielded a very large 

 population of ostracodes from depths of more than 12,000 feet in the 

 Madagascar Basin and Mozambique Channel. The ability to examine 

 these abyssal faunas has great promise in the understanding of similar 

 forms recovered from future drill cores taken from the ocean floor. 

 Another study in progress was concerned with the evaluation of the 

 Bering Strait as an effective barrier to migrant benthonic animals of 

 microscopic size, of which the ostracodes are a good example because 

 of their abundant fossil record. Examination of large faunas from the 

 Arctic and the northern Pacific is made possible by application of 

 computers and numerical taxonomic methods applied to biogeography. 



Martin A. Buzas completed a study which utilizes a multivariate 

 statistical model called canonical analysis for comparison of biofacies. 

 Computation of canonical axes on the IBM 7094 simultaneously com- 

 pared abundances of 45 species of Foraminifera distributed in 182 

 samples off the Texas coast. Data concerning the spatial distribution 

 of Foraminifera from Rehoboth Bay, Delaware, are currently being 

 analyzed by use of the binomial, Poisson, and negative binomial dis- 

 tributions. In the Choptank River, Buzas is taking four foraminiferal 

 samples monthly at each of three stations distributed across a faunal 

 gradient. The temperature, salinity, oxygen, chlorophyll, phosphate, 

 and nitrate are also measured at each station each sampling time. 

 The study is unique in that its design will permit a statistical analysis 

 of the relationship of the fauna to several environmental variables. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION PALEOBIOLOGY 109 



Richard Cifelli continued his studies of planktonic Foraminifera 

 in the North and Equatorial Atlantic regions. In conjunction with K. 

 Norman Sachs of the U.S. Geological Survey, a study of the abundance 

 relationships between planktonic Foraminifera and Radiolaria showed 

 the two groups to occur in roughly equal numbers over much of the 

 western North Atlantic. This is rather surprising, as Radiolaria 

 appear to be mostly rare or absent in sediments over most of the 

 North Atlantic, while planktonic Foraminifera are prolific. This 

 implies that the siliceous radiolarian test is chemically less stable than 

 the calcitic foraminiferal test in the oceanic environment, and that 

 most radiolarian tests are dissolved and recycled into the sea water. 

 Interesting results were obtained from a study, in conjunction with 

 R. K. Smith, of the distribution of planktonic Foraminifera in the 

 waters east of the Grand Banks. The distributional patterns of the 

 Foraminifera appear to substantiate Worthington's hypothesis of a 

 two gyred circulation in the North Atlantic. 



Additional samples of Tertiary consolidated foraminiferal ooze 

 were dredged and cored from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. It has been 

 postulated by Cifelli, V. T. Bowen of the Woods Hole Oceanographic 

 Institution, and R. Siever of Harvard University that consolidation 

 of the oozes is a consequence of uplift of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. 



Two major research projects were undertaken by Erie Kauffman 

 during the past year. A detailed study of the Mesozoic bivalve family 

 Inoceramidae revealed for the first time the morphology and evolution 

 of interior shell features and provided a basis for a radically new 

 taxonomy. In connection with this Kauffman spent a month diving 

 in the Florida Keys studying the mode of life and habitat of living 

 counterparts of the inoceramids, the Isognomonidae. A second study 

 dealing with the ecologically unique cool-water bivalve Thyasira was 

 completed. The ancestral Cretaceous thyasirids from North America 

 were monographed for the first time. A detailed comparative study 

 of living and Cretaceous Thyasira provided a means of interpreting 

 paleoanatomy and equating the ecology of living and fossil representa- 

 tives; it revealed major evolutionary trends in the group. 



Porter M. Kier spent the year researching on the fossil echinoid 

 order Oligopygoida. He studied all the available specimens, excavated 

 many lanterns, made a crystallographic analysis of the plates, and 

 redescribed all the species. After a collecting trip to Jamaica to 

 obtain more specimens, he is now completing a monograph of the 

 order. Kier also gave three lectures this year at Yale University as a 

 part of a training program established between the geology department 

 of the University and the Smithsonian Institution. 




110 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



During the year 1966, Kenneth M. Towe completed installation of 

 the electron microscope facilities housed in the department of 

 paleobiology. Cooperative work is now underway with several staff 

 members. 



At the semicentennial meetings of the American Association of 

 Petroleum Geologists held in St. Louis, Missouri, Towe and Cifelli 

 presented findings dealing with shell-wall infrastructure in the cal- 

 careous Foraminifera which clarified some misconceptions and incon- 

 sistencies in the studies of earlier workers. Their paper demonstrated 

 that the so-called "radial wall" is not necessarily constructed of fibrous 

 or prismatic crystals of calcite oriented perpendicular to the shell 

 surface, and also that the lamellar character of the walls of several of 

 the Foraminifera is not in agreement with the models suggested for this 

 group. This work, being prepared for publication, will have a strong 

 influence on existing systems of classification of the Foraminifera, which 

 have been heavily weighted by patterns of wall structure. 



In the application of the electron microscope to the study of bryozoan 

 shell material, Towe and Richard S. Boardman made promising 

 progress in interpreting patterns and mode of calcification of zooecial 

 wall structure. It was found that in some Recent species of hetero- 

 poroid Bryozoa an interpretation of edgewise addition of calcite 

 crystals within the zooecial wall, as seen in the electron microscope, 

 helps to explain the origin of the reverse lamellar structures seen in the 

 light microscope. Continued work is providing more insight into this 

 problem. 



In addition to these studies, Towe has projects underway dealing 

 with the mineralogical composition of colloidal iron oxides of both 

 organic and inorganic origin, the morphology of clay minerals, as well 

 as studies of shell structure in molluscs and brachiopods. 



Thomas R. Waller, who joined the staff in April, completed a study 

 (Columbia University Ph.D. dissertation, 1966) of the evolution of a 

 common group of bivalves, including the western Atlantic Bay and 

 Calico scallops and their fossil ancestors. The application of population 

 systematics, utilizing automated data processing, has revealed a picture 

 of species forming and evolving on the Atlantic coast relatively rapidly, 

 so that within a period of about ten million years parallelism, con- 

 vergence, and extinction can be demonstrated at the species level. In 

 contrast, related scallops in the eastern Pacific have evolved relatively 

 slowly and today are morphologically primitive and ecologically 

 generalized. 



Richard A. Robison, a specialist in trilobites and Cambrian stratig- 

 raphy, joined the Museum staff in mid June after five years on the 

 geology staff at the University of Utah. 




This silicified Permian brachiopod Waagenconcha abichi, in an unusually fine 

 state of preservation, was obtained by R. E. Grant of the U.S. Geological 

 Survey from the Khisor Range in West Pakistan. 



Electron micrographs of skeletal calcite of marine organisms (see p. 110): 

 1 , Cross-sectional view of pore canals and microcrystals in the wall of Cibicides 

 refulgens (Foraminifera) X 3,200. 2, View of the pores and microcrystals in 

 the ventral wall of Ammonia beccarii (Foraminifera); the various micro- 

 crystalline arrays in these minute animals may prove useful in their classifi- 

 cation, X 4,500. 3, Calcite crystals lining the zooecial wall in Heteropora 

 pelliculata (Bryozoa); the crystals point in the direction of growth, X 6,000. 

 4, Microscopic unicellular marine algal coccoliths (Coccolithus huxleyi) useful 

 to geologists for dating ocean sediments, X 5,000. 5, Aragonite crystals in a 

 portion of the nacreous layer in the shell of Brachiodontes recurvus (Mollusca) , 

 X 5,000. 



Overleaf > 





RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION PALEOBIOLOGY 111 



Honorary research associate J. T. Dutro, U.S. Geological Survey, 

 continued his research on Paleozoic brachiopods, concentrating on a 

 biostratigraphic analysis of the fossils from the Redwall limestone in 

 Arizona. Field work included a 3-week trip to Nevada with G. A. 

 Cooper and R. S. Boardman, R. J. Ross, Jr. (U.S. Geological Survey), 

 H. B. Whittington (Harvard University), Fred Shaw (Mt. Holyoke 

 College), and Brian Norford (Canadian Geological Survey) for the 

 purpose of examining the regional stratigraphy of the Ordovician and 

 making pertinent collections of fossils. 



Honorary associate curator Franco Rasetti, continued his work on 

 the Cambrian trilobite faunas of the Taconic region of New York. 

 Discovery of a Middle Cambrian fauna in addition to the previously 

 recognized Lower Cambrian trilobites resulted in the preparation of 

 several manuscripts of major importance to an understanding of the 

 paleogeography and tectonics of the region during that period. 



Research associate W. P. Woodring continued his study of the 

 Tertiary Mollusca of the Canal Zone and adjoining parts of Panama. 

 A paper on the Panama land bridge as a sea barrier was prepared for 

 publication. 



Working as a predoctoral intern under the direction of Woodring, 

 Carmen Perrilliat is completing a study of Miocene mollusks from Santa 

 Rosa, Veracruz, Mexico. 



Charles W. Harper, in residence under a visiting research associate- 

 ship sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences, has been studying 

 the brachiopod collections as prelude to the preparation of manuscripts 

 that include studies of Llandovian to Eifelian Chonetacea, of Middle 

 Devonian North American chonetids, and of Middle Ordovician brach- 

 iopods from Venezuela; a monograph on the family Stropheodontidae; 

 and a memoir on the Brachiopods of the Arisaig series of Nova Scotia. 



Under its new curator, Jack W. Pierce, the recently established 

 division of sedimentology, of the department of paleobiology, com- 

 pleted its first year. During this formative period, space was remodeled 

 for division laboratories and storage areas, equipment was acquired 

 for a basic laboratory, and some field equipment was procured. 

 Arrangements were made to start, in June, a feasibility study and 

 initial sampling leading toward a research project treating the sedi- 

 mentation and geochemical processes of the continental shelf and coast 

 of Argentina. This is a joint venture between Pierce, Frederic Siegel 

 (George Washington University), and Argentine scientists. His work 

 on the evolution of the North Carolina Outer Banks is continuing. 



M. Grant Gross who agreed to join the staff in August 1966, will 

 continue his work on the cores obtained from Midway Island in con- 

 junction with J. I. Tracey and H. S. Ladd of the U.S. Geological Survey. 




112 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



MINERAL SCIENCES 



Research in meteorites was concentrated on phase analysis in chon- 

 drites and in several unusual iron meteorites. For the second year 

 this work was to a large extent supported by the National Aeronautics 

 and Space Agency. Under an Air Force contract a number of rare, 

 so-called unequilibrated chondrites were analyzed chemically. 



Kurt Fredriksson completed a study of some 30 L — and LL — 

 group (amphoterites) chondrites and demonstrated that these two 

 groups can be clearly separated on the basis of olivine and pyroxene 

 compositions, although bulk analyses may show overlap. An intensive 

 study of the Sharps meteorite showed that this is one of the few H — 

 group chondrites that has variable olivine and pyroxene composition. 

 Furthermore, it contains fragments of a carbonaceous chondrite and 

 secondary chondrules, thus three igneous and three "sedimentary" 

 cycles can be recognized. This demonstrates that chondrites are 

 products of very complex extraterrestrial rock-forming processes that 

 took place early in the development of the solar system. 



Research by Brian Mason during the year was directed toward 

 investigation of the chemical and mineralogical composition of stony 

 meteorites. Specimens of special research interest from the Museum's 

 collection are being chemically analyzed, and their mineralogy 

 studied by microscope, x-ray diffraction, and electron microprobe 

 techniques. A detailed examination of meteorites collected at Wolf 

 Creek crater in Western Australia in 1963 resulted in the discovery 

 of two new minerals. Descriptions of these were to be presented at a 

 meeting of the International Mineralogical Association in Cambridge, 

 England, in September 1966. 



During July 1 965 Mason collected tektites in central Australia and 

 mapped their distribution. In August he was joined by E. P. Henderson 

 and together they carried out similar field work on the Nullarbor 

 Plain, a limestone plateau 500 miles from east to west and 100 miles 

 north to south, extending across South and Western Australia. As a 

 result of this and previous expeditions to Australia the museum now 

 possesses the finest collection of well localized tektites in any institution. 

 These are being intensively studied in cooperation with scientists from 

 the NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California. 



Roy S. Clarke, Jr., continued his research on tektites cooperatively 

 with colleagues at the Corning Glass Works and the U. S. Geological 

 Svirvey. Studies in progress on the potassium-argon ages of artificial 

 glasses made from natural materials may have important implica- 

 tions for the presently accepted interpretation of the potassium-argon 

 experiment as applied to tektites. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION MINERAL SCIENCES 113 



Eugene Jarosewich analyzed 12 new meteorites, and a paper present- 

 ing the results of these analyses is in press. In addition the pyroxenes 

 from the Chainpur, Clovis, and Coolidge meteorites were analyzed, 

 and a series of separate chemical determinations performed on the 

 meteorites Knyahinya, Mangwendi, and Bjurbole. 



Installation of an X-ray fluorescence analyzer in the chemical 

 laboratory was completed. Jarosewich and Joseph Nelen are devel- 

 oping a method for analyzing stony meteorites by this technique. The 

 fact that these meteorites have a silicate matrix containing finely 

 dispersed metallic inclusions presented a problem, and the first 

 objective was to obtain a fine, homogeneous powder. Various fusion 

 techniques were tried but with disappointing results; however, acid 

 attack to decompose the metal phase, followed by neutralization and 

 low temperature ignition to oxides, seems to offer promise. 



After spending a month in Australia collecting tektites, E. P. 

 Henderson continued his studies of hexahedrites. On December 31, 

 1965, he retired and was appointed honorary research associate. 



George Switzer continued his work on the garnet group of minerals, 

 and with William G. Melson completed a study of plagioclase-spinel- 

 graphite xenoliths in iron-bearing basalts from Disko Island, Greenland. 

 In November 1965 he was re-elected Secretary of the Mineralogical 

 Society of America and appointed U.S. member of the Museums 

 Commission of the International Mineralogical Association. 



Paul E. Desautels completed a morphological study of nickel veyite 

 and continued his studies of radioactive minerals from Mexico and 

 lead oxychloride minerals from Greece. 



John S. White completed his description of plattnerite and with 

 Brian Mason worked on the descriptions of two new mineral species 

 from the Wolf Creek, Australia, meteorite. 



Peter B. Leavens joined the staff in November 1965 as an NAS-NRC 

 postdoctoral research associate. His primary interest is the mineralogy 

 and geochemistry of iron-manganese phosphates in pegmatites, and 

 he has been studying suites of these minerals in the Museum collections. 

 He has finished a reexamination of the incompletely described man- 

 ganese phosphate bermanite. In cooperation with T. A. Simpson 

 of the Alabama Geological Survey, he is preparing a paper on the 

 iron-manganese phosphates found in a pegmatite in Coosa County, 

 Alabama. 



Among other research projects undertaken by Leavens are a paper 

 completed on the calcium oxalate mineral whewellite; another in 

 preparation on the OH:F ratio in the beryllium phosphate, herderite; 

 and one co-authored with C. S. Hurlbut of Harvard University on the 

 lithium silicates bikitaite and eucryptite. The specimens used in this 




114 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



study were collected by Leavens and John White at the Foote Mineral 

 Company mine, King's Mountain, North Carolina. 



William G. Melson continued his investigations of oceanic rocks. 

 Studies centered on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and include greenstones, 

 basalts, and dolerites from lat. 22°N. ; ultramafic and alkali-rich mafic 

 rocks from St. Paul's Rocks; and an alkali "basalt" (olivine nephelinite) 

 and numerous other rock types dredged from the St. Paul's Rocks area. 

 Melson in November 1965 participated in cruises to the 22°N. area 

 (cruise 1 of the R.V. Thomas Washington) and in March 1966 to St. 

 Paul's Rocks and the Romanche Trench in the equatorial Atlantic 

 (cruise 20 of the R.V. Atlantis II). This work is part of cooperative 

 investigations of the Mid-Atlantic with Tj. H. van Andel of the Scripps 

 Oceanographic Institution and Vaughan T. Bowen of Woods Hole 

 Oceanographic Institution. 



The cruises were extremely successful from a petrologic standpoint. 

 Dredging produced very large and complex suites of rocks which will 

 be examined into and perhaps through 1966. 



Studies of greenstones from the R.V. Chain cruise 44 (1964) were 

 completed and the results are in press. In addition, several short 

 notes were submitted for publication on oceanic rocks and minerals 

 that include montomorillonites (mainly saponite) in hydrothermally 

 altered basalts from the 22°N. area, and an olivine nephelinite dredged 

 near St. Paul's Rocks during cruise 20 of the R.V. Atlantis II. 




The Collections 

 CARE AND CONSERVATION 



SPECIMENS ACCESSIONED, IDENTIFIED, AND DISTRIBUTED— 

 FISCAL YEAR 1966 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



Creation of the anthropological conservation laboratory, which 

 replaces and incorporates the previous preparatory service, represents 

 a major step forward. In August 1965, the laboratory was set up in 

 its new quarters, and considerable progress was made in the acquisition 

 of basic supplies and equipment. The staff includes A. Joseph Andrews, 

 who remains chief preparator, and Bethune Gibson, who joined the 

 staff as a technician specializing in conservation, under the immediate 

 supervision of Gus W. Van Beek. During the year, a total of 1,313 

 specimens, ranging from fish-oil-saturated wooden bowls, from the 

 Northwest Coast of the United States, to African iron weapons, to 

 ancient Greek and Italic pottery, to bark paintings from Australia, 

 have been cleaned and given conservation treatment. The laboratory 

 personnel have also experimented with various materials in their search 

 for solutions to problems of conservation. Noteworthy discoveries 

 include development of processes for the removal of noncarbonate 

 encrustations on pottery, and ubiquitous black "ink blot" and root 

 deposits that occur on ancient pottery from various environmental 

 situations. 



115 




116 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



In conjunction with the conservation laboratory, museum technicians 

 have begun to reorganize the storage of all the ethnological specimens 

 from the Northwest Coast of North America, the Philippines, and Korea 

 and Japan. In the process it was determined that the U.S. National 

 Museum has one of the finest collections from the Northwest Coast 

 made in the late 1 800s — as yet unstudied except for an occasional piece 

 which has attracted attention because of its esthetic qualities. Reorga- 

 nization of the Old World archeological collection was also completed. 



Further progress was made in the storing of the Old World archeo- 

 logical collections. The Asian anthropological collections are being 

 systematically reviewed, and the orderly rearrangement of the skeletal 

 storage was completed. 



During the year the archives of anthropology, which, under the 

 management of Margaret C. Blaker continues to serve a large number 

 of anthropologists, linguists, and other scholars, received and answered 

 an increasing number of inquiries and orders for photographs. 



The archives, formerly a part of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 

 are old, extensive, and well organized. The contents include ethno- 

 graphic, linguistic, archeological, historical, and some physical anthro- 

 pological manuscript material, large collections of personal papers of 

 a few anthropologists, and a very extensive collection of photographs. 

 The restrictions which limited the BAE archives to materials on the New 

 World having been removed, and being by no means limited to 

 materials gathered by the Smithsonian staff, the archives now may 

 receive anthropological manuscript and photographic material relating 

 to all parts of the world, as well as the personal papers of anthropolo- 

 gists. The collection thus becomes a national archive of anthropology, 

 serving the needs of ethnohistory, culture history, ethnology, compara- 

 tive linguistics, and the history of anthropology. 



Important additions to the manuscript and photographic collections 

 received during the year include the personal papers of James Owen 

 Dorsey, ethnologist with the Bureau of American Ethnology, 1878— 

 1895, a gift from J. O. Dorsey's granddaughter, Mrs. Fitzhugh McLean 

 of Takoma Park, Maryland. These papers, consisting of diaries, 

 correspondence, autobiographical notes, lectures, and a volume 

 of notes on Siouan ethnography and language, have been listed in 

 detail and fill three manuscript boxes. The original manuscript 

 which was printed as Ojibway Texts by William Jones (Truman 

 Michelson, ed., Publications of the American Ethnological Society, 

 vol. 7, pts. 1, 2, 1917, 1919), but was previously uncatalogued in the 

 archives, was identified and arranged by comparison with the pub- 

 lished texts. The originals include partial interlinear translations 

 as well as the full English translations that were published. About 




THE COLLECTIONS CARE AND CONSERVATION 117 



5,000 prints have been made from glass negatives in the collection of 

 the former Bureau of American Ethnology and copied on safety film. 

 However, about 15,000 glass negatives remain uncopied, as well as 

 nearly 10,000 nitrate film negatives which are in an unsafe, deterio- 

 rating condition. Copying will continue as funds become available. 



VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



The completion of the west wing of the natural history building 

 enabled the division of fishes to move its collections into the new 

 quarters during the summer of 1965. This move, accomplished in 

 about three months through the cooperation of all staff members of the 

 ichthyological laboratory, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, involved the 

 transfer of approximately 300,000 jars of specimens in alcohol. Simul- 

 taneously, the collection was rearranged and preservative was restored. 

 All identified but uncataloged collections were placed in their proper 

 family along with the cataloged material. The collection of large 

 preserved specimens is gradually being transferred to 300 monel-metal- 

 lined tanks in the west wing. 



The collections of reptiles and amphibians, moved into new quarters 

 in FY 1965 and for the most part arranged in taxonomic order, are now 

 more easily accessible. The program of relabeling and re bottling 

 continued. 



In the division of birds over 400 new cases were added to the specimen 

 storage area. With a few exceptions, anatomical specimens of birds 

 preserved in fluid are no longer accessioned into the collections, as they 

 are intended for dissection and replacement rather than for permanent 

 reference. To encourage their use by qualified investigators, a catalog 

 of the anatomical collections is being prepared, to be available on 

 request. During the year Mrs. Julian Stein, Jr., volunteered her 

 services towards rearranging the egg data file, and Mrs. John W. Boyd 

 volunteered her services for working on maps of the distribution of 

 Antarctic birds and for translating Russian articles. 



In the division of mammals, by the end of the year, the bulk of the 

 collections were housed in permanent quarters that place major groups 

 in areas which combine storage and research facilities. This is par- 

 ticularly significant for certain groups like the rodents and primates 

 for which special plans have been made for identification and service 

 facilities. 



The osteological collections of cetaceans (whales, porpoises, and the 

 like) are still scattered in various temporary storage areas, and plans 

 are under consideration to centralize them in separate warehouse and 

 research facilities outside of the Natural History Museum. 




118 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



During the year the department acquired a typewriter system 

 designed to reduce cataloging and processing time by providing 

 replicate labels and/or catalog cards from a single typing. The 

 system features macro- and micro-typewriter units that can be oper- 

 ated from a punched-paper tape. The data typed on the label with 

 the microtypewriter is automatically reproduced on the catalog cards, 

 and as many cards as needed can be made up from the tape. 



For most of the newly-established divisions of the department, 

 curatorial activities centered around rearrangement of the collections 

 in the new storage areas of the west wing. In the division of mollusks, 

 largely through the diligence of Museum technician, Florence Ruhoff, 

 15,736 lots were cataloged, a total higher than that during any of the 

 past 6 years and three times the number produced last year. As a 

 result, nearly all the large number of new accessions received during 

 the year are processed and incorporated into the collections. A 

 program initiated to sort the large backlog of uncataloged mollusk 

 accessions to systematic and geographic groupings is expected to make 

 this material more available to the researcher interested in obtaining 

 representatives of various families of mollusks from particular faunal 

 regions. 



Museum specialist H. B. Roberts began to identify the backlog of 

 American crabs, particularly those from the Gulf of Mexico and the 

 Caribbean, in a program designed not only to physically reduce the 

 backlog but also to diversify the collections by arranging exchanges of 

 excess material with other institutions. Also by providing routine 

 identifications of specimens of crabs forwarded to the museum for 

 examination, Roberts has materially reduced the burden of routine 

 work formerly assumed by the professional staff. 



ENTOMOLOGY 



Under grants from the National Science Foundation, more than 

 20,000 specimens of Central and South American Lepidoptera were 

 sorted and labeled; a catalog of New World Stenomidae was prepared; 

 a photographic file of Stenomidae was initiated; about 5,000 specimens 

 of Ataenius were mounted and labeled; some 54,000 miscellaneous in- 

 sects were counted, sorted to order, and placed in fresh alcohol; 46,000 

 aquatic beetles were sorted to family and placed in fresh alcohol; 

 and 5,100 water beetles were prepared for critical study by extraction 

 of the male terminalia and by pinning, labeling, and sorting to genus. 



Summer student intern Judith Ann Holland sorted, determined to 




THE COLLECTIONS CARE AND CONSERVATION 119 



genus, and placed in the working collection about 1 2,000 miscellaneous, 

 unidentified Scarabaeidae. Pre-doctoral associate Robert Gordon 

 studied, identified, and revised our collections of Hydroporus (Dytis- 

 cidae). Another pre-doctoral associate, E. D. Cashatt, segregated and 

 studied 3,000 American Chrysauginae, and prepared over 800 genitalic 

 slides. 



Museum aid Gloria House sorted to family nearly 84,000 beetles, 

 mostly alcoholic material from Bolivia; she also mounted and labeled 

 nearly 2,500 specimens, and mounted an additional 500. Mrs. Joan 

 Ledbetter labeled, sorted and distributed over 97,000 miscellaneous 

 insects, of which some 25 percent was Lepidoptera and Diptera. 

 Mrs. Sophie Lutterlough restored, relabeled, and rehoused thousands 

 of ticks, most of which had dried out, as well as great numbers of 

 dried myriapods and arachnids; and cleaned and sorted many mi- 

 croscope slides. Mrs. Mary Ann Floyd completed rearrangement of 

 the Odonata collection by working over the Oriental and North 

 American sections. 



J. F. Gates Clarke continued his reorganization and classification of 

 the Neotropical Microlepidoptera with the incorporation of over 4,000 

 specimens into the working collection. William D. Field transferred 

 and reclassified several families of Lepidoptera, formerly housed in 

 non-standard drawers; among the families transferred were the 

 Amathusiidae, Brassolidae, and our extensive collection of Old World 

 Papilionidae. Ralph E. Crabill found and verified the status of some 

 dozen type specimens of the C. H. Bollman myriapod collection; he 

 continued remounting O. F. Cook's microscopic slides, mostly typical, 

 and he restored, relabeled, and rehoused large numbers of dried 

 myriapods and arachnids, some of which turned out to be unsuspected 

 type specimens. Research associate K. C. Emerson transferred and 

 expanded the Mallophaga collection into new slide boxes; during this 

 process he added the material from the Carriker collection. Miss 

 Helle Starcke, assistant to research associate Robert Traub, began the 

 transfer and arrangement of the Siphonaptera collection into new 

 slide cabinets. 



Over 5,000 microslides of small Diptera were prepared for the 

 collection by student aids at Radford College under a contract grant 

 administered by the Department of Agriculture. This contract, 

 initiated in 1961, has resulted in the addition of more than 30,000 

 microslides of specimens to the national collection. Agriculture 

 contracts with other universities and individuals have resulted in the 

 mounting and labeling of an additional 30,000 insects during the 

 current year; for the several years during which these contracts have 




120 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



been in effect the national collection has benefited by the preparation 

 of some 1 1 5,000 specimens. 



BOTANY 



The addition of 363 new all-steel herbarium cases represents a 

 major advance in specimen storage in the National Herbarium. Of 

 these, 214 were incorporated into the phanerogamic segment of the 

 herbarium, allowing for the much needed expansion of a small portion 

 of the collections. The lichen collections are now completely housed 

 in new steel cases as is a portion of the grass herbarium. Other steel 

 cases were moved into the offices of curators to replace the wooden 

 cases in which their study specimens had been kept. Over 2,000 more 

 steel cases, however, will be needed to convert the entire herbarium 

 to modern steel storage cabinets. 



During the year E. Yale Dawson, working with Charles F. Rhyne, 

 curated and added to the research collections the entire accumulated 

 backlog of algae. These totaled 14,931 specimens, In addition, a 

 "wet stack" storage facility was established to house fluid-preserved 

 specimens of algae. These specimens are represented by dummy 

 sheets inserted in taxonomic sequence among the dried and pressed 

 collections making the total collection available to users through 

 consultation of a single file. 



Integration of New World and Old World type specimens into a 

 continuous series was completed by Velva E. Rudd who has also 

 transferred the formerly separate fruit collection into the general 

 herbarium. Bulky fruits are now to be found taxonomically arranged 

 in cases near the appropriate genus or family, a great convenience in 

 systematic studies. 



PALEOBIOLOGY 



In the division of paleobotany, nearly all of the primary and second- 

 ary type specimens of fossil plants have been segregated from the main 

 body of the paleobotanical collections. There remain only certain 

 elements of the Tertiary collection that require checking and relocation. 

 The main body of the reference collection is being organized by 

 Arthur D. Watt of the U.S. Geological Survey staff and placed in its 

 permanent arrangement in the main storage area of the division's 

 new quarters. 



In consequence of the lengthy period during which the laboratory 

 of vertebrate paleontology has been concerned with exhibition, a very 

 considerable backlog of preparation for the study series and general 




THE COLLECTIONS CARE AND CONSERVATION 121 



attention to the condition of the study and reference collections has 

 accumulated. Much of this backlog pertains to preparation of plaster- 

 encased blocks included in field collections acquired during the past 

 several years. 



General arrangement of the reference and study collections of 

 fossil vertebrates has been completed, since their move from the old part 

 of the building to the east wing, except for the rather large collec- 

 tion of Oligocene titanotheres, including several type specimens 

 which together with certain large fish and reptile specimens, are 

 temporarily laid out on case tops pending construction of covered 

 storage racks. 



The curatorial activities in the division of invertebrate paleontology 

 centered on processing type specimens. More than 5,000 types were 

 checked against published literature, cataloged, and placed in the 

 collection. Carding of more than 500 type specimens representing a 

 large number of publications furthered the preparation of the planned 

 published list of types on deposit in the Museum. Also, the Tertiary 

 and Ordovician stratigraphic collections were moved to facilitate 

 storage of tens of thousands of specimens and make them more accessible 

 to the scientists directly involved with their use. The Ordovician 

 material was sorted geographically and stratigraphically during the 

 move. 



The U.S. National Museum has been a repository for approximately 

 16,200 sediment samples, some of which were collected as early as 1840 

 by the U.S. Coast Survey. The division of sedimentology is making a 

 detailed inventory of these samples, the usefulness of which has been 

 limited by lack of an adequate inventory and of a single storage place. 

 An attempt is also being made to collate the samples with any published 

 or unpublished sample data and with available station information. A 

 preliminary tabulation discloses that 10,343 of the samples are from 

 the Atlantic continental shelf of the United States, including 815 from 

 the recent U.S. Geological Survey - Woods Hole Oceanographic 

 Institution project; 1,772 off the West Coast of the United States; 400 

 from Alaskan waters; 2,000 from the Albatross cruises; and 1,571 which 

 can not be associated with any available station information or for 

 which no information has been found. The remaining few samples 

 are from the Caribbean Sea, the southeast Pacific Ocean, and the 

 Arctic Ocean. 



230-457—66 11 




122 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 



SPECIMENS IN THE NATIONAL COLLECTION MAY 31, 1966 



Anthropology 1,005,034 



Cultural Anthropology 967,217 



Physical Anthropology 37,817 



Invertebrate Zoology 12, 149,941 



Crustacea 1,477,157 



Worms 651,097 



Echinoderms 80, 244 



Mollusks 9,941,443 



Vertebrate Zoology 2, 845, 582 



Mammals 336,825 



Birds 520, 338 



Reptiles and Amphibians 166, 778 



Fishes 1,821,641 



Entomology 17,345,519 



(Former Division of Insects total, 1963 15,978,513) 



(divisional totals are shown from this date) 



Coleoptera 306,477 



Hemiptera 233,879 



Lepidoptera 261,428 



Myriapoda and Arachnida 405, 544 



Neuropteroids 159,678 



Botany 3,238,876 



Phanerogams 2,009,269 



Ferns 256,568 



Grasses 394,317 



Cryptogams 533, 758 



Plant Anatomy 44, 964 



Paleobiology 13,233,558 



Invertebrate Paleontology 13,179,878 



Vertebrate Paleontology 49, 104 



Paleobotany 4, 576 



Mineral Sciences 427, 655 



Mineralogy 121,648 



Meteorites 7, 351 



Petrology 298, 656 



Total Natural History Collections 50, 246, 1 65 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



Among the several collections of ethnological materials from Africa 

 received during the year, especially noteworthy were a complete 

 costume of a Tuareg man, acquired from Sgt. Mohamcd Ali Ag. 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 123 



Mamatal, of the Mali army; and a collection of artifacts from the 

 Mandara Mountain area of northern Cameroon, collected for the 

 Smithsonian by Paul Hinderling. Darius Thieme, a musicologist, 

 has been engaged for over a year in making a collection of Nigerian 

 musical instruments for the Smithsonian, and two shipments of these 

 have arrived. 



About 600 artifacts of the Canela Indians (Brazil) were collected 

 in the field. Including items as varied as life-size ceremonial masks 

 and maroon chalk ear plugs, they constitute the largest and most 

 complete assemblage of South American tribal material in the Museum. 



An exceptionally well selected and documented collection received 

 directly from Asia in recent years is the Province Henry collection of 

 201 Taiwan tribal objects consisting of clothing, religious paraphernalia, 

 utensils, weapons, woodwork, and other items. An outstanding collec- 

 tion of 255 purchased and donated textiles was assembled mostly in 

 India and Thailand by Mrs. Elizabeth Bayley Willis. Other valuable 

 collections received were a Burmese collection of 600 objects from 

 William C. Sturtevant, 125 Korean masks of folk drama from Professor 

 Duhyun Lee, and 135 items of Iranian costumes from Mrs. Ethel Jane 

 Bunting. From Mrs. Mary Slusser in Nepal came jewelry, clothing, 

 toys, and games. 



A cast of the Niah Cave skull (North Borneo Paleolithic) as recon- 

 structed by Don R. Brothwell, was received in exchange through 

 Kenneth P. Oakley of the British Museum (Natural History) and 

 placed on exhibit. 



VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



Major and significant additions to the vertebrate zoology collections 

 of the Department were made through Smithsonian expeditions and 

 surveys parts of the world, particularly in Latin America, the Pacific, 

 and Africa, as well as by gift and exchange. 



Two outstanding collections of fishes, totaling approximately 10,000 

 specimens, are the several thousand fishes from the western Atlantic, 

 Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea, received from the Exploratory 

 Program of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and a large collection 

 of bathypelagic fishes, made during a survey of the fauna of the Cali- 

 fornia Current, received from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 

 La Jolla, California. 



More than 5,000 specimens of reptiles and amphibians were cata- 

 loged, including 122 specimens as types or para types of new taxa. 

 Donald Broadley of the Umtali Museum, Rhodesia, sent a carefully 

 selected series of specimens, including paratypes of many new species 




124 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



and also representatives of species not previously in the collections. 

 Bernard Martof, of the University of North Carolina, gave his synoptic 

 collection of 2,154 salamanders of the genus Leurognathus, which formed 

 a basis for his recent review and revision of the genus. Gustavo 

 Orces-Villagomez, Quito, Ecuador, deposited his extensive collec- 

 tions of Ecuadorian reptiles and amphibians in the Museum, admirably 

 supplementing the locality-oriented specimens obtained in Ecuador by 

 Dr. Peters. The Pacific Ocean Biological Survey Program of the 

 Smithsonian has continued to add to the lizard collections from all 

 parts of the Pacific. 



Outstanding accessions of birds include a specimen of Pterodroma 

 baraui, received by exchange through Dr. Jouanin, and a specimen of 

 Wetmorethraupis sterrhopteron and two of Conioptilon mcilhennyi, by ex- 

 change through Dr. Lowery. Both of these latter two genera are newly 

 described tropical American passerines and as such represent exciting 

 additions to the national collections. Among the anatomical speci- 

 mens received were major collections from Chile, the Indian Ocean, 

 and North America. Other valuable acquisitions included two skele- 

 tons of the lesser flamingo donated by John G. Williams and skeletons 

 of the cahow and black-capped petrel presented by David B. Wingate. 



More than 11,000 specimens of mammals were accessioned. Ap- 

 proximately 8,000 of these result from major field operations in Vene- 

 zuela and Africa, funded by Defense Department contracts. Important 

 collections of bats were received from Belem, Brazil, through a col- 

 laborative relationship with the Belem Virus Laboratory (Instituto 

 Evandro Chagas); from Peru, from A. L. Tuttle; and from Colombia, 

 sent by C. J. Marinkelle. In addition, an important collection of 387 

 mammal specimens from West Pakistan was received from Col. Robert 

 Traub. 



INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



One of the most significant of the additions to the collections of 

 invertebrate zoology was a series of over 9,000 lots of leeches and an 

 extensive library of books and reprints on the Hirudinea, received as a 

 bequest from the late J. Percy Moore. 



Mollusks accessioned during the year include nearly 15,000 speci- 

 mens from the southeastern Pacific, acquired through the studies of 

 Harald A. Rchder. Joseph P. E. Morrison arranged the transfer of 

 4,000 mollusks and 3,000 radula slides left by the late J. A. Weber of 

 Miami. Also added to the collection were over 9,000 marine mollusks 

 from southeast Asia, collected by Joseph Rosewater while participating 

 in the International Indian Ocean Expedition. 




On Philippine expedition of Donald R. Davis, the rare butterfly Troganoptera 

 trojana was sought. Here, Julian Jumalon of San Carlos University sets out 

 a damaged male, which is deep velvet black, except for a brilliant red collar 

 and metallic green patches along both wings, as bait to lure the more valu- 

 able female. Below: a perfect female specimen, of which very few have 

 ever been obtained. 




On a Smithsonian collecting trip, Paul J. Spangler with Malaise insect trap 

 at campsite in Costa Rica ("see p. 99), near Esparta, July 1965. 



Spangler aspirating water beetles from his net after collecting in a pond at 

 Puntarenas, Costa Rica. 



?" ji^FOSR* 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 125 



Transfers of specimens from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service added 

 two large series of decapod crustaceans from the Gulf and Caribbean 

 area, and also a large collection of caprellid amphipods. Two large 

 collections of decapod crustaceans were received through the Institute 

 of Marine Science, University of Miami, and an extensive collection of 

 freshwater crustaceans was donated by Northeast Louisiana State 

 College. 



Representatives of over 60 species of echinoderms, many not pre- 

 viously represented in the collection, were received on exchange from 

 the British Museum. More than 50 species of echinoids taken during 

 the International Indian Ocean Expedition were also added to the 

 collection during the year. 



ENTOMOLOGY 



Over 856,000 insects and allies were accessioned during the year, 

 the second highest total in the history of the department of entomology. 

 The tremendous F. C. Bishopp collection of ticks accounted for more 

 than a third of this total. Holotypes of 1,122 species were accessioned 

 during the year. 



The largest and most important gift of Coleoptera was the C. H. 

 Dieke library and world-wide collection of 24,468 specimens of 

 Coccinellidae. Various members of the departmental staff added 

 materially; P. J. Spangler collecting 72,825 specimens and O. S. Flint 

 10,234. The Dominican survey produced 7,244 specimens, with 

 many more to be counted and accessioned. The African survey, under 

 H. W. Setzer of the division of mammals, added 17,174 insects, a 

 very important acquisition because our African material is so limited. 



Upon the death of research associate Carl J. Drake, full custody of 

 the outstanding Drake Hemiptera collection passed to the Smithsonian 

 and to the care of the division of Hemiptera. A small but critically 

 important lot of 236 bedbugs from R. L. Usinger established our total 

 holdings as the world's richest collection of species and types in the 

 family Cimicidae. Other important acquisitions include 2,617 

 miscellaneous insects from various parts of the world, from K. W. 

 Cooper; 2,567 from the American tropics, collected by W. D. Duck- 

 worth; 2,202 from various parts of the world, from N. L. H. Krauss; 

 and 1,045 North American aphids from J. O. Pepper. 



Lepidoptera and Diptera received include 7,305 specimens collected 

 on Dominica by J. F. G. Clarke and his wife; 18,850 Lepidoptera 

 and Diptera collected in the Philippines and Dominica by D. R. 

 Davis; 12,778 moths and flies from Dominica and Central America, 

 by O. S. Flint; 16,928 Central American Lepidoptera and Diptera 




126 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



collected by P. J. Spangler and his wife. From non-staff members 

 came 487 butterflies from Greece, from J. C. Coutsis; 786 New Zealand 

 moths collected by T. H. Davies; 848 North American Lepidoptera 

 and Diptera presented by G. F. Edmunds; 5,205 flies from North 

 America, by K. Khalaf; and 3,841 moths from North America, from 

 F. W. Stehr. The largest single accession was 43,160 flies collected 

 by W. W. Wirth in Dominica, probably one of the finest representa- 

 tions of Diptera ever assembled from any of the islands of the Lesser 

 Antilles. 



In addition to the Bishopp tick collection, the Myriapoda and 

 Arachnida holdings were augmented by several lots of critical im- 

 portance: G. E. Ball presented over 600 chilopods mostly from pre- 

 viously unsampled parts of Mexico; Smithsonian and Department of 

 Agriculture colleagues collected an impressively sizeable assortment 

 of myriapods and arachnids on Dominica; through W. Engelhardt 

 was obtained an exchange of 29 chilopods from the K. W. Verhoeff 

 collection, including a number of paratypes, an acquisition of critical 

 importance because of Verhoeff' s position as a pioneer in myriapod 

 studies. 



Among neuropteroids received were important synoptic collec- 

 tions of Finnish Trichoptera from M. Meinander; Czechoslovakian 

 Trichoptera from J. Sykora; North American Hydroptilidae from 

 R. L. Blickle; and North American Plecoptera and Trichoptera from 

 S. G. Jewett. The single most important accession was the collection 

 of mostly South American Mallophaga assembled by the late research 

 associate M. A. Carriker; it contains 17,882 specimens mounted on 

 7,830 slides and included 653 holotypes. K. C. Emerson was respon- 

 sible for the transfer from the Department of Defense of over 2,000 

 slides of Anoplura and Mallophaga. 



A. B. Gurney of the Agriculture staff donated some 4,500 specimens 

 of insects and allies collected by him in Ethiopia. H. W. Setzer and 

 J. Neal of the division of mammals transferred more than 8,000 insects 

 collected incidentally during their mammal survey in Iran. Both of 

 these accessions were most welcome because previously these areas were 

 virtually unrepresented in our collection. 



The U.S. Department of Agriculture transferred over 76,500 insects, 

 many of them of considerable importance because of associated host 

 data. One important acquisition in this transfer was the Alfieri 

 synoptic collection of Egyptian Hymenoptera, Coleoptera, Lepidop- 

 tera, and Neuroptera, consisting of about 7,400 specimens representing 

 some 3,500 species and including several hundred types or cotypes. 

 The tremendous value may be appreciated when it is noted that of the 

 531 species of wasps and bees identified specifically in the Alfieri 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 127 



collection, over 70 percent were not represented previously in the 

 Museum collection by identified specimens. Two other welcome 

 lots were nearly 4,400 Diptera from Arizona collected by C. W. 

 Sabrosky; and 800 Hymenoptera from North and South America, 

 collected by D. R. Smith. 



BOTANY 



The inception of an algal research program has stimulated an 

 increase in the botanical materials that are so important for staff 

 activities. Holdings of algae have been appreciably enhanced by 

 acquisition of the herbarium of the Beaudette Foundation for Marine 

 Biology, comprising 7,677 specimens of dried and fluid-preserved 

 seaweeds. E. Yale Dawson donated over 1,600 specimens of algae 

 from his personal collections and more than 600 algal specimens were 

 received on exchange from the Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 

 Paris. 



The Plitt lichen herbarium of 21,564 mounted specimens was trans- 

 ferred to the Museum from the national fungus collections in Beltsville, 

 Maryland. Mason E. Hale contributed 5,833 specimens of lichens 

 resulting from his field work in Southeast Asia and the University of 

 Iowa donated its lichen herbarium of 3,000 specimens. 



Under a research project supported in part by the National Science 

 Foundation, Conrad V. Morton deposited 16,174 photographs of type 

 specimens of ferns from European herbaria, greatly augmenting the 

 fern type collections. An outstanding collection of 622 ferns of Assam, 

 India, collected by Walter M. Koelz, was received on exchange from 

 the University of Michigan. Added to the already rich collections of 

 grasses from Brazil were 1,216 collected for the museum by Lyman B. 

 Smith and 1,035 specimens received on exchange from the Royal 

 Botanic Gardens, Kew, collected by the British agrostologist W. Derek 

 Clayton. These grass collections from Brazil together with the others 

 in the U.S. National Herbarium form part of the basis for Thomas R. 

 Soderstrom's continuing research on the luxuriant grass flora repre- 

 sented in this country. 



Recent botanical activities on the Island of Dominica in conjunction 

 with the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological Survey have resulted 

 in the accessioning of 22,560 flowering plants collected by staff members 

 Wallace R. Ernst and Dan H. Nicolson and by Grady L. Webster of 

 Purdue University and Kenton L. Chambers of Oregon State Uni- 

 versity. The Dominican plants form the basis, in part, for a forthcom- 

 ing flora of the island being undertaken by staff members of the 

 department of botany in collaboration with botanists at other insti- 

 tutions. 




128 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Accessions of woods from the Juan Fernandez Islands represented 

 many new taxa for the national collections, including Lactoris fernan- 

 deziana, sole species of the Lactoridaceae, a family endemic on these 

 Pacific islands. A rare, historically important collection of woods, 

 received in exchange from the museum of the V. L. Komarov Botanical 

 Institute, Leningrad, came from plants, grown in the former imperial 

 botanical gardens of St. Petersburg, which were brought into cultivation 

 through the efforts of early Russian plant explorers. Over half of the 

 64 specimens represent plants for which there had been no previous 

 examples in the wood collections of the Museum. A collection of 138 

 wood specimens gathered by Kenton L. Chambers, Oregon State 

 University, were the first to result from the Bredin-Archbold-Smith- 

 sonian Biological Survey of Dominica. 



PALEOBIOLOGY 



As a gift from J. Harlan Johnson of the Colorado School of Mines, 

 the division of paleobotany received 76 slides containing 18 primary 

 and 80 secondary types of fossil algae from Guatemala. Fieldwork by 

 Francis M. Hueber and James P. Ferrigno under support from the 

 Roland W. Brown fund for paleobotanical research brought to the 

 collections about 329 specimens of Lower Devonian plant fossils from 

 the Beartooth Butte formation at Beartooth Butte and Cottonwood 

 Canyon, Wyoming. Noteworthy specimens in the collection include 

 a series of excellent examples of Bucheria ovata Dorf, Drepanophycus 

 spinaeformis Goeppert and representative examples of Psilophyton wy- 

 omingense Dorf. From fieldwork in eastern Canada, 1,255 specimens of 

 Lower and Middle Devonian plant remains were added to the collec- 

 tions. A large number of anatomically preserved plants comprise the 

 significant element of this collection. 



Outstanding among accessions of fossil vertebrates is a collection of 

 approximately 473 specimens of early Tertiary mammals from various 

 localities in the Green River Basin of southwestern Wyoming, princi- 

 pally from the lower member of the middle Eocene Bridger formation, 

 made by C. Lewis Gazin and Franklin L. Pearce under funds provided 

 by the National Science Foundation. The collection is rich in remains 

 of the smaller mammals, including the condylarth Hyopsodus; various 

 primates, rodents, insectivores, and carnivores; and the ungulates 

 Orohippus and Helaletes. Among the larger mammals represented are 

 Tillotherium and the perissodactyls Hyrachyus and Palaeosyops. 



A particularly noteworthy acquisition, made by purchase through 

 the Walcott fund, is an unusually well represented skeleton of a Miocene 

 cetothere whale from the Choptank formation of Maryland. The 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 129 



specimen was collected by Richard Warren of Robert, Louisiana, from 

 the Calvert Cliffs south of Flag Pond. In addition to skull portions, 

 ribs, and chevrons, the specimen includes an articulated series of 20 

 vertebrae from the first cervical to the first lumbar and 14 vertebrae 

 from the eleventh lumbar to the twelfth caudal, only the second to 

 tenth lumbars missing. Not only is the specimen remarkable for its 

 completeness but it is the first cetothere to be discovered in the Chop- 

 tank formation. 



Other notable accessions of vertebrate fossils include a collection 

 of well over 100 specimens, principally fossil mammals, from a fissure 

 filling near Ladds, in Bartow County, Georgia, acquired by purchase 

 through the Walcott fund from Shorter College in Rome, Georgia, and 

 approximately 100 specimens of late Pleistocene vertebrates from the 

 Puebla Valley of Mexico collected by Clayton E. Ray, under funds 

 provided in part by the National Science Foundation. 



The most notable addition to the invertebrate fossil collections was a 

 gift of more than 30,000 specimens given by Johns Hopkins University. 

 Included was a valuable identified, biologically arranged series of 

 Tertiary mollusks, one of the most complete reference collections 

 known of these organisms from the East Coast of North America. 

 Many of the specimens were collected from localities no longer available 

 because of construction activities. In addition, more than 500 type 

 specimens previously deposited at the University were transferred to 

 the Museum. 



The Walcott bequest provided funds for several other major addi- 

 tions to the collections: Robert B. Neuman collected more than 1,000 

 Cambrian and Ordovician specimens in Newfoundland; E. G. Kauff- 

 man and N. F. Sohl collected an important silicified fauna from the 

 Mesozoic of Trinidad and additional Tertiary and Mesozoic specimens 

 from the West Indies. 



More than 15,000 Tertiary mollusks were accessioned from the 

 American Museum of Natural History including the specimens on 

 which a major study of Tertiary and Recent pectinids was based. 



A gift of Triassic brachiopods from the Academy of Sciences of the 

 USSR is considered of great value. Arranged through A. Dagis of the 

 Institute of Geology and Geophysics, the gift will provide reference 

 information for distributional studies of several genera. 



Most of the accessions made during the year involved type specimens 

 sent to the Museum, and a sizeable increase over previous years has 

 been noted in the number of types deposited. 




130 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



MINERAL SCIENCES 



The past year has been an important one for the growth of the 

 meteorite collection. Specimens were added from 26 meteorites not 

 previously represented and an additional 1 7 new meteorites are now 

 represented in the form of thin-sections. The total number of meteor- 

 ites added to the collection was 137, and the total thin-sections was 

 85. Over 1,800 tektite specimens from various localities were also 

 added. The Carl Bosch collection of nearly 600 meteorites was 

 acquired. A number of these will be important additions to the 

 collection. 



The University of Minnesota agreed to place their meteorite collec- 

 tion, comprising approximately 120 specimens, on deposit in the Mu- 

 seum. Some are of great scientific value. In return an educational 

 exhibition of representative meteorites will be prepared and put on 

 display at the University. It is hoped that similar agreements can be 

 reached with other universities possessing a few unrepresentative 

 but scientifically important meteorite specimens. 



The rate of growth of the mineral and gem collections remained 

 high. Quantities of scientifically important type specimens were 

 obtained from various sources. Also, excellent specimens were ob- 

 tained from all the newly discovered occurrences of any importance 

 noted during the year. Considerable time and effort was spent in 

 negotiating for and obtaining the Carl Bosch collection of minerals and 

 meteorites (approximately 28,000 specimens including almost 600 

 meteorites), which is the most important collection acquired since the 

 Roebling and Canfield additions in 1926. The collection will be 

 described more fully in the next annual report. It is estimated that it 

 represents a 20 percent increase in the total mineral collection. 



Among several important gifts by individuals to the mineral col- 

 lection were a fine large tourmaline crystal from Madagascar, presented 

 by Randolph Rothschild; a superb specimen of torbernite from France, 

 by the Lester Barrer family; an extraordinary specimen of the new 

 mineral francevillite from Gabon, by Mr. Bernard T. Rocca; and an 

 exquisite suite of fine specimens of Mexican agate, by Colonel E. M. 

 Barron. Other fine specimen material and much research material 

 was obtained, as usual, through exchange. Numerous new and rare 

 species were added including dellaite, moctezumite, sonoraite, coaling- 

 ite, rosenhahnite, sakuralite, marokite and gaudefroyite. 



The usual program of planned addition of specimens through 

 use of the Roebling and Canfield endowments continued. The 

 Roebling fund this year provided an extraordinarily beautiful specimen 

 of vivianitc from near Richmond, Virginia; a large and striking speci- 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 131 



men of barite from the mines of southern Illinois; excellent specimens 

 of vanuralite and francevillite from Gabon; arsenopyrite from Portugal; 

 silver from Mexico: amethyst from Ontario; and epidote from Baja 

 California. Outstanding among additions from the Canfield fund 

 are specimens of rubellite from Brazil, large sphene and spinel crystals 

 from Madagascar, arsenopyrite from Portugal, and an unusually 

 large and rare classic twin crystal of cumengite from Baja California. 



As in all recent years, the gem collection has received additions of 

 great value and importance. Chief among the gifts was a 138.7-carat 

 star ruby. This magnificent gem, the largest and finest star ruby on 

 record, came as a gift from Rosser Reeves. Two very large faceted 

 gems of topaz purchased through the help of the Chamberlain fund: 

 one, weighing 7,725 carats is golden yellow; the other, weighing 2,680 

 carats, is colorless. Through the Roebling fund a 55-carat faceted 

 and flawless gem of petalite, the largest of its kind on record, was 

 obtained. The suite of carvings was enriched by a series of 13 jade 

 carvings given by Mrs. Mildred Taber Keally and 9 carvings of various 

 materials given by Sidney Krandall. 



Many interesting and described suites of rocks containing chemically 

 analyzed specimens added to the petrology collections came from the 

 U.S. Geological Survey, the British Museum, Cambridge University, 

 and from several independent researchers through transfers, exchanges, 

 and gifts. The number of oceanic rocks in the collections was greatly 

 increased by a gift from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 

 through Vaughn T. Bowen, of a large suite of rocks dredged from the 

 Mid-Atlantic Ridge at lat. 22° N. 



Through Professor H. H. Hess of Princeton University was received 

 the Mayagiiez, Puerto Rico, serpentinite core, one of the National 

 Science Foundation's preliminary Mohole Project cores. The core is 

 unique in furnishing a nearly 1,000-foot section of a serpentinite body, 

 much of which has been unusually well described. 




Exhibits 



Although the new hall of physical anthropology was opened last year, 

 work continued on some of its exhibits. The most important addition 

 is a mural painted by Alton S. Tobey reconstructing in detail the 

 performance of a prehistoric surgical operation, trephination, by the 

 Incas in Machu Picchu. Reconstructions of varieties of australo- 

 pithecines and of Oreopithecus by Jay Matternes are in preparation. 



The preparation of exhibit scripts by Gus W. Van Beek for the hall 

 of Old World archeology, continued. The first of several murals 

 planned for this hall — this one of Egyptian mourning women — was 

 completed in the Egyptian alcove by artist Laurinda Gupta. A new 

 mold and plastic cast was made from the plaster cast of the monumental 

 statue of the Semitic storm-god Hadad for use in the Syro-Palestinian 

 alcove. 



The African hall progressed significantly during the year with the 

 completion, under the scientific direction of Gordon D. Gibson, of sev- 

 eral exhibits on the cultures of Central and East Africa. A push-button 

 program of African music was installed to illustrate with sounds several 

 African instruments; the musical selections are correlated with color 

 slides showing the manner in which the instruments are played. 

 Additional units on East Africa and a section on southern Africa remain 

 to be installed. 



Advice on the preparation of particular exhibits was received from 

 several regional experts: Roger Summers, curator of the National 

 Museum of Rhodesia at Bulawayo, consulted at length with the staff 

 on the preparation of a diorama to represent the building of Zimbabwe; 

 Barrie Reynolds, Director of the Livingstone Museum, Zambia, 

 provided advice, pictures, and specimens for use in the preparation of 

 a life group to illustrate an episode in an initiation ceremony; Alan 

 Jacobs of the University of Illinois assisted very significantly in the 

 preparation of plans for an exhibit on the Masai; Conrad Reining, 

 Priscilla C. Reining, Walter Deshler, and Irving Kaplan advised with 

 respect to several other exhibits dealing with East Africa; and the Voice 

 of America staff assisted in supplying an appropriate recording for the 

 Chinese opera exhibit in the East Asian hall. 



132 




The popular gem hall was remodeled to approximately twice its former size, 

 most of the exhibits were redesigned, and new gems were added to the 

 displays. 




The newly opened jade hall, adjacent to the gem hall, displays the Maude 

 Monell Vetlesen jade collection of Chinese jade carvings of the 16th through 

 19th centuries. 




MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY EXHIBITS 133 



In the department of vertebrate zoology the preparation of cases in 

 the hall of osteology and of models and cases for the hall of cold- 

 blooded vertebrates continued. 



Through the efforts of Joseph Britton, who joined the staff as an 

 exhibits specialist during the year, development of exhibits for the hall 

 of life in the sea progressed rapidly. The alcove on reproduction and 

 parental care, illustrating the diversity of these activities in marine 

 invertebrates, and a special exhibit featuring a random access slide 

 projector designed to demonstrate a variety of marine organisms, 

 neared completion. Specifications were completed for 32 models 

 needed for other alcoves and 15 of these are in varying stages of pro- 

 duction. Work continued on the coral reef group and on cases il- 

 lustrating defense and methods of feeding. 



Considerable progress was made in the laboratory of vertebrate 

 paleontology in the restoration and mounting of new skeletons and the 

 remounting and repairing of previously displayed materials to be used 

 in the new hall of Quaternary vertebrates. Mounts of the skeletons of 

 the saber-tooth cat Smilodon, the four-horned antelope Stockoceras, and 

 the dire wolf Aenocyon were completed, as were restorations and repairs 

 to the previously displayed mastodon skeletons, and the Cumberland 

 Cave wolverine Gulo was remounted. Mounting of the skeletons of 

 the giant ground sloth Eremotherium from Panama and the smaller 

 Paramylodon from Rancho La Brea, involving extensive use of heavy but 

 essentially concealed steel supports, was well along toward completion. 



A diorama illustrating terrestrial life of the Triassic period, the first 

 of four scheduled for the balcony of the dinosaur hall, was installed after 

 completion of the background by Jay Matternes. 



The new exhibit hall of gems was completed and opened in September 

 1965, and the new exhibit of the Maude Monell Vetlesen collection of 

 carved Chinese jades of the 16th to 19th centuries was opened in 

 January 1966. Paul E. Desautels wrote the scripts for these new 

 exhibits and the design was by Mrs. Dorothy Guthrie. Construction 

 work was completed and installation of cases was begun on the new 

 exhibits of physical geology and meteorites. 



Further details concerning the construction of exhibits in the Museum 

 of Natural History are to be found in the report of the U.S. National 

 Museum, Office of Exhibits, pages 52-53. 



230-457 — 66 12 




Staff Publications 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



The Smithsonian Office of Anthropology in December 1965 inaugu- 

 rated a new series, "Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology,'-' 

 replacing the "Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletins," which will 

 be closed out with the appearance of numbers 196-200. The new 

 series introduces a larger (quarto) size, double-column page, with 

 higher quality printing and better reproduction of halftones and line 

 drawings, and it has no geographical restrictions on subject matter. 



Angel, J. Lawrence (with Paul T. Baker). Old age changes in bone 

 density: sex and race factors in the United States. Human 

 Biology, vol. 37, pp. 104-121, 1965. 



Collins, Henry B. Pre-Eskimo cultures in Alaska. Pp. 374—396 in 

 Japanese Archaeology, no. 1, Pre-Ceramic Age, Sosuke Sugihara, 

 ed., Tokyo, 1965. (In Japanese.) 



. Foreword (as Chairman of Directing Committee) to volume 



12, Arctic bibliography, p. v, 1965. 



Crocker, William H. A preliminary analysis of some Canela re- 

 ligious aspects. Revista do Museu Paulista, n.s., vol. 14, pp. 163— 

 173, 1963. 



. Ethnology: South America. Pp. 112-152 in Handbook of 



Latin American Studies, no. 27. University of Florida Press, 1965. 



Evans, Clifford. The dating of Easter Island archeological obsidian 

 specimens. No. 18 in Reports of the Norwegian Archaeological 

 Expedition to Easter Island and the East Pacific, vol. 2: Mis- 

 cellaneous reports. Monographs of the School of American 

 Research and the Kon-tiki Museum, no. 24, part 2, pp. 469-495, 

 1965. 



Evans, Clifford, and Meggers, Betty J. Cronologia relativa y 

 absoluta en la costa del Ecuador. Cuadernos de Historia y 

 Arqueologia, Ano XI, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 3-8, 1961. Casa de la 

 Cultura Ecuatoriana, N video del Guayas, Guayaquil, 1965. 

 — . Guia para prospeccao arqueologica no Brasil. Museu 

 Paraense Emilio Goeldi, Guia no. 2, 57 pp., Belem, 1965. 



(contributing editors). Archaeology: South America. Pp. 



56-75 in Handbook of Latin American Studies, no. 27. University 

 of Florida Press, 1965. 



134 




PUBLICATIONS ANTHROPOLOGY 135 



Ewers, John C. Artists of the Old West. Garden City, N.Y.: 

 Doubleday & Co., 240 pp., 164 plates (35 in color), 1965. 



. The emergence of the Plains Indian as the symbol of the 



North American Indian. Ann. Rep. Smithsonian Inst, for 1964, 

 pp. 531-544, 1965. 



. Last of the Buffalo Indians. The American West, vol. 2, 



no. 2, pp. 26-31, 1965. 



. Iroquois Indians in the Far West; Literate fur trader among 



the Upper Missouri tribes; and The Medicine Rock of the Marias. 

 Chapters (pp. 129-136, 137-148, 165-168) in The Red Man's 

 West, ed. Michael S. Kennedy. New York: Hastings House, 1965. 

 . Plains Indian reactions to the Lewis and Clark Expedition. 



Montana, the Magazine of Western History, vol. 16, no. 1, 



pp. 2-12, 1966. 

 . The museum historian as scholar. Smithsonian Year 1965, 



pp. 105-109, 1966. 

 . Chiefs from the Missouri and Mississippi, and Peale's 



silhouettes of 1806. Smithsonian Journal of History, vol. 1, no. 1, 



pp. 1-26, 1966. 

 Holland, C. G. Migration in a late archaic horizon. Quarterly 



Bulletin, Archeological Society of Virginia, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 



65-68, March 1965. 

 . An archeological survey of the Oakley Reservoir. Illinois 



State Museum, Preliminary Reports, no. 5, 1965. 

 Hoyme, Lucile E. The nasal index and climate: A spurious case of 



natural selection in man. Amer. Journ. Phys. Anthropol., n.s., 



vol. 23, pp. 336-337, 1965. 

 Meggers, Betty J. Ecuador. Vol. 49 in Ancient peoples and places, 



220 pp., London and New York, 1966. 

 Meggers, Betty J., and Evans, Clifford. A transpacific contact 



in 3000 B.C. Scientific American, vol. 214, no. 1, pp. 28-35, 



January 1966. 

 Meggers, Betty J.; Evans, Clifford; and Estrada, Emilio. Early 



formative period of coastal Ecuador: the Valdivia and Machalilla 



phases. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology, vol. 1 



(whole vol.), xxi-f- 234 pp., 196 pis., 115 figs., 30 tables, Decem- 

 ber 1965. 

 Metcalf, George S. The barbed wire fence. Corral Dust, vol. 10, 



no. 3, pp. 4-6, 1965. 

 . Archeology: Western Hemisphere. Pp. 69-70 in Americana 



Annual, 1966. 

 Riesenberg, Saul H. Table of voyages affecting Micronesian 



Islands. Oceania, vol. 36, no. 2; pp. 155-170, 1965. 




136 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Stewart, T. D. The problem of analyzing the height of the cranial 

 vault. In Homenaje a Juan Comas en su 65 aniversario, vol. 2 

 (Antropologia fisica), pp. 359-366. Mexico, 1965. 



■ . The scapula of the first recognized Neanderthal skeleton. 



Bonner Jahrbuch, vol. 164, pp. 1-14, 1964. 



Some problems in human paleopathology. Chapter (pp. 



43-55) in "Human Paleopathology," ed. Saul Jarcho. New 

 Haven: Yale University Press, 1966. 



Sturtevant, William C. Report of the Book Review Editor. Amer- 

 ican Anthropologist, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 768-771, 1965. 



. Preliminary annotated bibliography on eastern North 



American Indian agriculture. Proceedings of the 21st Southeastern 

 Archaeological Conference, Southeastern Archaeological Confer- 

 ence Bulletin no. 3, pp. 1-24, Cambridge, Mass., 1965. 



. Historic Carolina Algonkian cultivation of Chenopodium or 



Amaranthus. Ibid., pp. 64-65, 1965. 



— . Ethnographic details in the American drawings of John 

 White, 1577-1590. Ethnohistory, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 54-63, 1965. 

 . Couvade: Toward the resurrection of Father Schmidt's 



stillbirth. American Anthropologist, vol. 67, no. 5, p. 1287, 1965. 



. Ethnological collections and curatorial records. Museum 



News, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 16-19, 1966. 

 . Duration of graduate study for the PhD. Fellow Newsletter 



(American Anthropological Assoc), vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 3-4, 1966. 



INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



Bothma, J. du P. Preliminary identification manual for African 

 mammals, pt. 1, Hyracoidea, 15 pp., 1965. 1 



Corbett, G. B. Preliminary identification manual for African mam- 

 mals, pt. 2, Menotyphla, 10 pp., 1966. 1 



Gibbs, Robert H., Jr., and Weitzman, Stanley J. Cryptostomias 

 psychrolutes, a new genus and species of astronesthid fish from the 

 southwestern Pacific Ocean. Vidensk. Medd. Dansk. Naturh. 

 Foren., vol. 128, pp. 265-271, 2 figs., 1965. 



and Wilimovsky, Norman J. Family Alepisauridae. In Fishes 



of the Western North Atlantic. Sears Found. Mar. Res., Mem. 1, 

 pt. 5, pp. 482-497, 4 figs., 1966. 



1 These are the result of a part of the Smithsonian Institution's effort for the 

 International Biological Program, and were instituted by H. W. Setzer. 




PUBLICATIONS INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 137 



Greenwood, P. Humphry; Rosen, Donn E. ; Weitzman, Stanley H.; 



and Myers, George S. Phyletic studies of teleostean fishes with 



a provisional classification of living forms. Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. 



Hist., vol. 131, art. 4, pp. 341-455, 425 figs., April 1966. 

 Handley, Charles O., Jr. [Review], Bats, by G. M. Allen. Atlantic 



Naturalist, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 165-166, 1965. 

 ■. [Review], Aves Brasileiras, by S. Frisch and J. D. Frisch. 



Auk, vol. 83, no. 1, p. 144, 1966. 

 . [Review], Songs of Brazilian birds, by J. D. Frisch. Auk, 



vol. 83, no. 1, p. 144, 1966. 



A synopsis of the genus Kogia (pygmy sperm whales). In: 



Whales, dolphins, and porpoises, ed. K. S. Norris, pp. 62-69, 



1 fig. Berkeley: Univ. Calif. Press, 1966. 

 Humphrey, Philip S. Auks, Murres, and Puffins. In A. Wetmore, 



et al., Water, prey, and game birds of North America. Washing- 

 ton: National Geographic Society, 1965. 

 Kanazawa, Robert H. The fishes of the genus Osteoglossum with a 



description of a new species from the Rio Negro. Icthyologica, 



the Aquarium Journal, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 161—172, 7 figs., May 



1966. 

 Krueger, William H, and Gibbs, Robert H, Jr. Growth changes 



and sexual dimorphism in the stomiatoid fish Echiostoma barbatum. 



Copeia, no. 1, pp. 39^3, 4 figs., March 1966. 

 Lachner, E. A. Family Echeneidae. In Fishes of the Marshall and 



Marianas Islands. U.S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 202, vol. 3, pp. 74-80, 



pi. 131, March 1966. 

 Paradiso, J. L., and Handley, Charles O., Jr. Checklist of mam- 

 mals of Assateague Island. Chesapeake Sci., vol. 6, pp. 167-171, 



1 fig., 1965. 

 Peters, James A. Miscellaneous notes on lizards from Ecuador. 



British Journ. Herp., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 195-197, 1965. 

 . Liste der rezenten Amphibien und Reptilien: Colubridae 



(Dipsadinae). Das Tierreich, lieferung 81, pp. 1-18, 1965. 

 . A note on the concept of subspecies. Bull. Virginia Herp. 



Society, no. 45, pp. 3-4, 1965. 

 and Robert Mullen. Electrocardiography in Caecilia guentheri 



(Peters). Physiological Zoology, vol. 39, pp. 193-201, 1966. 

 Ripley, S. Dillon. Saving the nene, world's rarest goose. National 



Geographic Magazine, vol. 128, no. 5, pp. 744-754, November 



1965. 




138 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



— — — . Le Martinet pale de Socotra (Apus pallidus berliozi). L'Oiseau 



et la Revue Francaise d'Ornithologie, vol. 35 (Berlioz Jubilee 

 Number), pp. 101-102, April 6, 1966. 



— — . A notable owlet from Kenya. Ibis, vol. 108, no. 1, pp. ISO- 

 IS?, January 1966. 

 and Heinrich, Gerd H. Additions to the avifauna of Northern 



Angola II. Postilla no. 95, pp. 1-29, February 1966. 



. Comments on the avifauna of Tanzania I. Postilla no. 96, 



pp. 1-45, March 1966. 

 — . Anatidae, parts 1, 2, and 3. In A. Wetmore, et al., Water, 



prey, and game birds of North Ameiica. Washington: National 



Geographic Society, 1965. 

 Schultz, Leonard P. Pseudochalceus kyburzi, a new characid fish 



from Colombia. Ichthyologica, The Aquarium Journal, vol. 37, 



no. 1, pp. 25-30, 3 figs., January 1966. 

 — . A new anemone fish, Amphiprion calliops from the Indo- 



Pacific Oceans. Ichthyologica, The Aquarium Journal, vol. 37, 



no. 2, pp. 71-76, 3 figs., February 1966. 

 . Parapercis kamoharai (family Mugilodidae), a new fish from 



Japan with notes on other species of the genus. Smithsonian 

 Misc. Coll., vol. 151, no. 4, pp. 1-4, 2 figs., May 1966. 



. Pseudorhegma diagramma, a new genus and species of 



grammistid fish with a key to the genera of the family and to the 



species of the subfamily Pseudogramminae. Ichthyologica, The 



Aquarium Journal, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 185-194, 4 figs., May 1966. 



— and Collaborators: Woods, Loren, P., and Lachner, Ernest 



A. Fishes of the Marshall and Marianas Islands. Families 

 Kraemeriidae through Antennariidae. U.S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 202, 

 vol. 3, 176 pp., figs. 133-156, pis. 124-148, March 1966. 



Short, Lester L., Jr. Hybridization in the flickers (Colaptes) of 

 North America. Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 129: pp. 307^28, 

 1965. 



— . Variation in West Indian flickers (Aves, Colaptes). Bull. 

 Florida State Mus., vol. 10, pp. 1-42, 1965. 



. [Review], The silent sky, the incredible extinction of the 



passenger pigeon, by A. W. Eckert. Atlantic Nat., vol. 20, pp. 

 245-246, 1965. 



- — . A melanistic pileated woodpecker specimen from Georgia. 

 Wilson Bull., vol. 77, pp. 404-405, 1965. 

 . Some spring migrant and breeding records from northern 



Nebraska. Nebraska Bird Rev., vol. 34, pp. 18-20, 1966. 

 — . A new Pliocene stork from Nebraska. Smithsonian Misc. 

 Coll., vol. 149, no. 9, pp. 1-11, 1 pi., 1966. 




PUBLICATIONS INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 139 



and Phillips, A. R. More hybrid hummingbirds from the 



United States. Auk, vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 253-265, 1966. 



and Banks, R. C. Notes on the birds of northwestern Baja 



California. Trans. San Diego Soc. Nat. Hist., vol. 14, pp. 41-52, 

 1965. 



and Burleigh, T. D. An intergeneric hybrid flycatcher 



{Contopus X Empidonax) from Idaho. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 

 vol. 78, pp. 33-37, 1965. 



and Simon, S. Additional hybrids of the slate-colored junco 



and the white-throated sparrow. Condor, vol. 67, pp. 438-442, 



1965. 

 Slud, Paul. Report on the ornithological portion of the WNRE 



ecological investigation in Costa Rica. Chapt. 7, in Research on 



bioecological classification for military environments found in 



tropic latitudes, Wilson, Nuttall, Raimond Engineers, Inc., 



Chestertown, Maryland, 1965. 

 Springer, V. G. Medusablennius chani, a new genus and species of 



blennioid fish from the Tuamotu Archipelago: its implication on 



blennioid classification. Copeia, no. 1, pp. 56-60, 3 figs., March 



1966. 

 Suttkus, Royal D., and Taylor, William Ralph. Notarus munitus, 



a new species of madtom, family Ictaluridae, from southern 



United States. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 78, pp. 169-178, 



3 figs., October 1965. 

 Watson, George E. et al. The families and genera of the petrels and 



their names. Ibis, vol. 107, pp. 401^05, 1965. 

 . [Review], The birds of Kentucky, by R. M. Mengel. Atlantic 



Naturalist, vol. 20, pp. 244-245, 1965. 

 . Pomarine jaeger near Lake Saranac. Kingbird, vol. 51, p. 



25, 1965. 

 Weitzman, Stanley H., and Chan, Lai Lee. Identification and 



relationships of Tanichthys albonubes and Aphyocypris pooni, two 



cyprinoid fishes from South China and Hong Kong. Copeia, 



no. 2. pp. 285-296, 7 figs., 1966. 

 Wetmore, Alexander (with other ornithologists). Water, prey, and 



game birds of North America. Pp. 464, 643 illus. Washington: 



National Geographic Society, 1965. 

 . Foreword. In Johnson, A. W., The birds of Chile and adja- 

 cent regions of Argentina, Bolivia, and Peru, vol. 1, pp. 9-10, 



December 1965. 

 — . The Birds of the Republic of Panama. Part I. — Tinamidae 



(tinamous) to Rynchopidae (skimmers). Smithsonian Misc. Coll., 



vol. 150, 483 pp., 73 figs., December 1965. 




140 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



. Aves. In Leaky, L. S. B., Olduvai Gorge 1951-61, vol. 1, 



pp. 71-72, 1965. 



. Additions to the list of birds of the Republic of Colombia. 



L'Oiseau et la Revue Francaise d'Ornithologie, vol. 35 (Berlioz 

 Jubilee Number), pp. 156-162, April 1966. 



INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



Barnard, J. Laurens. Marine Amphipoda of atolls in Micronesia. 



Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., no. 3516, vol. 117, pp. 459-552, 35 figs., 



December 1965. 

 . Marine Amphipoda of the family Ampithoidae from southern 



California. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., no. 3522, vol. 118, pp. 1-46, 



28 figs., December 1965. 

 Bowman, Thomas E. Cyathura specus, a new cave isopod from Cuba 



(Anthuroidea: Anthuridae). Stud. Fauna Curacao, vol. 22, no. 



85, pp. 88-97, 1965. 

 . Xilitloniscus, a new genus for the Mexican troglobitic isopod, 



Cordioniscus laevis Rioja (Oniscoidea: Trichoniscidae). Proc. Biol. 



Soc. Washington, vol. 78, pp. 209-215, 1965. 

 • ■ — ■ and Lancaster, L. J. A bloom of the planktonic blue-green 



alga, Trichodesmium erythraeum, in the Tonga Islands. Limnology 

 and Oceanography, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 291-293, 1965. 

 — -. Haptolana trichostoma, a new genus and species of troglobitic 

 cirolanid isopod from Cuba. Internat. Journ. Speleology, vol. 2, 

 no. 1, pp. 105-108, pis. 24-27, 1966. 



and Peterson, LaNelle W. Bibliography and list of new 



genera and species of amphipod crustaceans described by Clarence 

 R. Shoemaker. Crustaceana, vol. 9, pt. 3, pp. 309-316, pi. 22, 

 1965. 



Clark, A. M. Japanese and other ophiuroids from the collections of 

 the Munich Museum. Bull. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.), vol. 13, no. 2, 

 pp. 39-71, 1965. 



and Owen, H. G. Eucidaris Pomal, 1883, Papula Bayle, 1878, 



Cidaris papillataconoidea Parkinson, 181 1, and Cidaris savignyi Audouin, 

 1826, proposed suppression; coupled with validation of Eucidaris 

 Doderlein, 1887, Stereocidaris Pomel, 1883, and Diadema savignyi 

 Michelin, 1845. Bull. Zool. Nomencl., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 237-242, 

 1965. 



Cressey, R. F. A new species of Dentigryps Wilson (Copepoda, 

 Caligoida) from Madagascar. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 

 79, pp. 91-94, figs. 1-13, 1966. 




PUBLICATIONS VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 141 



. Bariaka alopiae n. gen., n. sp. (Copepoda, Caligoida), a 



parasite on the gills of a thresher shark. Bull. Mar. Sci., vol. 16, 

 pp. 324-329, 1966. 



Gonzalez, Juan G., and Bowman, T. E. Planktonic copepods from 

 Bahia Fosforescente, Puerto Rico, and adjacent waters. Proc.U.S. 

 Nat. Mus., no. 3513, vol. 117, 21 figs., pp. 241-304, August 1965. 



Hobbs, Horton H., Jr. A new crayfish from Alabama with observa- 

 tions on the Cristatus section of the genus Cambarus (Decapoda, 

 Astacidae). Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 79, pp. 109-116, 

 figs. 1-10, 1966. 



■ ■. Astacus oreganus Randall, 1840 (Crustacea, Decapoda): Pro- 

 posed suppression under the Plenary Powers. Bull. Zool. Nomencl., 

 vol. 22, pts. 5/6, pp. 351-354, 1966. 



. A new crayfish of the genus Cambarus from Tennessee with an 



emended definition of the genus (Decapoda, Astacidae). Proc. 

 Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 78, pp. 265-273, 12 figs., 1965. 



and Bedinger, M. S. Observations of a new troglobitic cray- 



fish with notes on the distribution of troglobitic crayfishes in the 



Ozark region. Bull. Nat. Speleological Soc, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 



93-96, 1 fig., 1965. 

 Manning, Raymond B. Stomatopoda from the collection of His 



Majesty, The Emperor of Japan. Crustaceana, vol. 9, pp. 249-262, 



pis. 11-12, figs. 1-2, 1965. 

 . Stomatopod Crustacea from the Atlantic coast of northern 



South America collected by the Calypso in 1961. Ann. Inst. 



Oceanogr. Monaco, vol. 44, pp. 359-384, figs. 1-9, 1966. 

 Morrison, Joseph P. E. New brackish water mollusks from Louisiana. 



Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 78, pp. 217-224, figs. 1-9, 1965. 

 . Notes on the genera of Hipponicidae. American Malaco- 



logical Union, Annual Reports 1965, pp. 33-34, 1965. 



On the families of Turridae. American Malacological 



Union, Annual Reports 1965, pp. 1-2, 1965. 

 Pawson, David L. The bathyal holothurians of the New Zealand 



region. Zool. Publ. Victoria Univ., Wellington, no. 39, pp. 1-33, 



1965. 

 . New records of echinoderms from the Snares Islands, to the 



south of New Zealand. Trans. Roy. Soc. New Zealand (Zool.), 



vol. 6, no. 25, pp. 253-260, 1965. 

 . The distribution of echinoderms along the east coast of New 



Zealand. Trans. Roy. Soc. New Zealand (Zool.), vol. 6, no. 24, 



pp. 245-252, 1965 




142 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Pettibone, Marian H. Two new species of Aricidea (Polychaeta, 



Paraonidae) from Virginia and Florida, and a redescription of 



Aricidea fragilis Webster. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 78, 



pp. 127-140, 11 figs., 1965. 

 . Revision of the Pilargidae (Annelida: Polychaeta), including 



descriptions of new species, and redescription of the pelagic 



Podarmus ploa Chamberlin (Polynoidae). Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 



no. 3525, vol. 118, pp. 155-208, 26 figs., March 1966. 

 Rice, Winnie H., and Kornicker, Louis S. Mollusks from the 



deeper waters of the northwestern Campeche Bank, Mexico. 



Publ. Inst. Mar. Sci., Univ. Texas, vol. 10, pp. 108-172, 16 pis., 



1965. 

 Roberts, Henry B. Fossil decapod crustaceans from the Marshall 



Islands. Geol. Survey Prof. Pap. 260-HH, pp. 1127-1131, pi. 303, 



1964. 

 Rosewater, Joseph. Studying living Tridacnidae in the Marshall 



Islands. American Malacological Union, Annual Reports 1965, 



pp. 18-19, 1965. 

 Rutzler, Klaus. Substratstabilitat in marinen Benthos als 



okologischer Faktor, dargestellt am Beispiel adriatischer Porifera. 



Int. Revue Ges. Hydrobiol., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 281-292, 965. 

 . Systematik und Okologie der Poriferen aus Litoral-Schat- 



tengebeiten der Nordadria. Z. Morph. Okol. Tiere, vol. 55, 



pp. 1-82, 1965. 

 Schmitt, Waldo L. Crustaceans. In Ann Arbor Science Library. 



204 pp. Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press, 1965. 

 Squires, Donald F., and Ralph, Patricia M. A new scleractinian 



coral of the genus Flabellum from New Zealand, with a new record 



of Stephanocyathus. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 78, pp. 



259-264, 1965. 



. Neoplasia in a coral? Science, vol. 148, pp. 503-505, 1965. 



. A new record for Leptopenus, a rare deep-water coral. Nature, 



207, pp. 878-879, 1965. 



ENTOMOLOGY 



Audy, J. R.; Nadchatram, M., Loomis, R. B.; and Traub, R. Trom- 

 bicula minor Berlese (Acarina: Trombiculidae) : Designation of 

 neotype with larval and post-larval stages from Malayan bats, and 

 new name, Myotrombicula dilarami, for T. minor Cooreman 1960 nee 

 Berlese, 1905. Acarologia, vol. 7 (suppl.), pp. 1-33, figs. 1—11, 

 1965. 




PUBLICATIONS ENTOMOLOGY 143 



Blake, Doris H. More new galerucine beetles with excised middle 



tibiae in the male (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae). Proc. U.S. Nat. 



Mus., no. 3528, vol. 118, pp. 233-266, 35 figs., February 1966. 

 . A review of the beetles of the genus Neobrotica and some 



closely related genera (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae). Proc. U.S. 



Nat. Mus, no. 3529, vol. 118, pp. 267-372, 16 figs., April 1966. 

 Carriker, M. A., Jr. A revision of the genus Furnaricola (Mallophaga) 



with descriptions of new species. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 118, 



no. 3532, pp. 405-432, 31 figs., 1966. 

 Clarke, J. F. Gates. Microlepidoptera of the Juan Fernandez 



Islands. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., no. 3508, vol. 117, pp. 1-106, 



111 figs., 1 pi., 1965. 

 Delfinado, Mercedes D. The culicine mosquitoes of the Philippines, 



Tribe Culicini (Diptera: Culicidae). Mem. Amer. Ent. Inst., no. 



7, 252 pp., 275 fig., 1966. 

 Drake, Carl J., and Hoberlandt, L. A revision of the genus Potamom- 



etra (Hemiptera: Gerridae). Acta Ent. Mus. Nat. Pragae, vol. 36, 



pp. 303-310. 

 and Maldonado Capriles, J. A new lacebug from Haiti 



(Hemiptera: Tingidae). Journ. Kansas Ent. Soc, vol. 38, pp. 317- 



319, July 1965. 

 Duckworth, W. D. Neotropical Microlepidoptera, VIII. A review 



of the genus Falculina with descriptions of new species (Lepidoptera: 



Stenomidae). Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., no. 3531, vol. 118, pp. 391- 



404, 1 pi, 5 figs., February 1966. 

 Emerson, K. C. Notes on some Mallophaga from Formosan mammals. 



Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 77, pp. 195-198, 1964. 

 . A new genus and species of Mallophaga. Ann. Mag. Nat. 



Hist., ser. 13, vol. 7, pp. 383-384, 1964. 

 . Three new species of Mallophaga from Dassies (Hyracoidea). 



Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 13, vol. 7, pp. 689-692. 1964. 

 . A new species of Mallophaga from the Caracara. Florida 



Ent., vol. 49, pp. 49-51, 1966. 

 and Stojanovich, C. J. A new species of Kelerimenopon (Meno- 



ponidae, Mallophaga) from the Philippine Islands. Florida Ent., 



vol. 48, pp. 117-119, 1965. 

 Flint, Oliver S., Jr. Taxonomy and life-histories of the caddisflies 



of the Lesser Antilles. Amer. Philos. Soc, Yearbook 1964, pp. 



262-263, 1965. 

 . New species of Trichoptera from the United States. Proc. 



Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 67, pp. 168-176, 11 figs., 1965. 

 . The genus Neohermes (Megaloptera: Corydalidae). Psyche, 



vol. 72, pp. 255-263, 19 figs., 1965. 




144 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



. Notes on certain Nearctic Trichoptera in the Museum of 



Comparative Zoology. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., no. 3530, vol. 118, 

 pp. 373-390, 4 figs., February 1966. 



Type disposition of some recently described Hemerobiidae 



(Neuroptera). Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 68, p. 24, 1966. 

 Hoogstraal, H., and Traub, R. The fleas (Siphonaptera) of Egypt: 



host-parasite relationships of cricetid rodents (Family Cricetidae, 



Subfamily Gerbillinae). Journ. Egyptian Public Health Assoc, 



vol. 40, pp. 141-175, 1965. 

 Muesebeck, C. F. W. Two new braconid parasites of the spruce 

 budworm (Hymenoptera). Ent. News. vol. 76, pp. 71-74, 



March 1965. 

 . A new diapriid (Hymenoptera: Diapriidae) from termite 



nests from South Africa. Journ. Ent. Soc. South Africa, vol. 27, 



pp. 188-190. 

 rice, R. D., and Emerson, K. C. A new species of Machaerilaemus 



(Mallophaga: Menoponidae) from the red-plumed bird of para- 

 dise. Ent. News, vol. 76, pp. 275-277, 1965. 

 Snyder, T. E. Our native termites. Ann. Rep. Smithsonian Inst. 



for 1964, pp. 497-506, 1 fig., 1965. 

 . Termite stowaways intercepted 1962-1966. PCO News, 



vol. 26, no. 4, p. 73, April 1966. 

 Sp angler, Paul J. A new species of Derovatellus from Guatemala and 



a description of its larva (Coleoptera: Dytiscidae). Coleopt. 



Bull., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 11-18. 

 Stone, A.; Scanlon, J. E.; Bailey, D. L.; Delfinado, M. D.; and 



Bram, R. A. Preliminary keys to the mosquitoes of Vietnam. 



South East Asia Mosquito Project, 1st revised ed. (mimeogr. publ.), 



92 pp., 5 pis., 1966. 

 Traub, R. Some opportunities and problems in medical entomology 



in the Asian-Pacific Region. Pacific Insects, vol. 7, pp. 21-28, 



1965. 



. A new subgenus of Ophthalmopsylla from Gilgit, West Pakistan, 



and a new Hopkinsipsylla from Libya (Siphonaptera: Leptopsyllidae) 



Journ. Med. Ent., vol. 2, pp. 123-136, figs. 1-23, 1965. 

 and Nadchatram, M. A revision of the genus Chatia Brennan, 



with synonymic notes and descriptions of the new species from 

 Pakistan (Acarina: Trombiculidae). Journ. Med. Ent., vol. 2, 

 pp. 17-37, figs. 1-24, 1965. 




PUBLICATIONS BOTANY 145 



BOTANY 



Cuatrecasas, Jose. Miscelanea sobre flora neotropica II. Ciencia 



(Mexico), vol. 24, no. 1, 2, pp. 121-124, June 1965. 

 . Una Bombacacea nueva de Venezuela. Bol. Soc. Venezolana 



Cienc. Nat., vol. 24, no. 109, pp. 153-155, September 1965. 

 . Some new Compositae from Peru. Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard., 



vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 304-313, October 1965. 

 . El genero Sorocea (Moraceae) en la costa occidental de 



Colombia. Ciencia (Mexico), vol. 24, pp. 185-188, February 1966. 

 . Establecimiento de la "Organization pro Flora Neotropica." 



Ciencia (Mexico), vol. 24, pp. 267-270, February 1966. 

 Dawson, E. Yale. An undescribed Afelocactus? in the Galapagos 



Islands. Cactus Succulent Journ., vol. 37, no. 5, p. 126, 1965. 

 . Further studies of Opuntia in the Galapagos Archipelago. 



Cactus Succulent Journ., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 135-148, 1965. 

 . Time of my life, pt. 1, 2. Cactus Succulent Journ., vol. 38, 



pp. 15-18, 58-60, 1966. 

 . Marine algae in the vicinity of Humboldt State College, 



Humboldt Co., California. Pp. 77. Humboldt State College, 



1965. 

 . Intertidal algae. In An oceanographic survey of the southern 



California mainland shelf. State of California Water Quality 



Control Board, Publ. 27 and 27-Appendix, Chapt. 8, and Table 



IX, 1965. 

 . Marine botany, an introduction. Pp. xii-J-371. New York: 



Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1966. 

 Ernst, Wallace R., et al. Documented chromosome numbers of 



plants. Madrono, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 122-126, October 1965. 

 Eyde, Richard H. The Nyssaceae in the Southeastern United States. 



Journ. Arnold Arb., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 117-125, April 1966. 

 Hale, Mason E., Jr. Parmelia subgenus Amphigymnia of Japan (in 



Japanese). Misc. Bryol. Lichenol., vol. 3, pp. 161, 162, 1965. 

 . Vertical distribution of cryptogams in a red maple swamp in 



Connecticut. Bryologist, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 193-197, 1965. 

 . Six new species of Parmelia from Southeast Asia. Journ. Jap. 



Bot., vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 199-205, 1965. 



Studies in the Parmelia borreri group. Svensk Bot. Tidskr., 



vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 38-48, 1965. 

 King, Robert M., and Robinson, Harold. Generic limitations in 

 the Hofmeisteria complex (Compositae : Eupatorieae). Phytologia, 

 vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 465-476, 1966. 




146 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



McClure, Floyd A. The bamboos — A fresh perspective. Pp. xv 



+ 347, Harvard Univ. Press, 1966. 

 Meyer, Frederick G., and Walker, Egbert H., eds., A flora of 



Japan (In English), by Jisaburo Ohwi. Pp. ix -f- 1067, 33 pis., 



18 figs., Smithsonian Institution, September 1965. 

 Morton, Conrad V. A new generic name in the Saxifragaceae. 



Leafl. West. Bot. vol. 10, no. 11, p. 181, August 1965. 

 — . Una Gesneriaceae nueva de Venezuela. Bol. Soc. Venezolana 



Ciena Nat., vol. 26, no. 109, pp. 156-158, September 1965. 

 . Observations on cultivated ferns, VIII. Stenochlaena. Amer. 



Fern Journ. vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 164-166, January 1966. 



— . Varieties of Ballota nigra in the eastern United States. 

 Rhodora, vol. 68, no. 773, pp. 93, 94, March 1966. 



— and Stern, William L. The United States National Her- 



barium. Plant Sci. Bull., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1-4, June 1966. 

 Parker, B. C, and Dawson, E. Yale. Non-calcareous marine algae 



from California Miocene deposits. Nova Hedwigia, vol. 10, pp. 



273-295, 1965. 

 Robinson, Harold E. A small collection of bryophytes from Kashmir. 



Bryologist, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 313-320, 1965. 

 — . Notes on Oreoweisia and Hypnella from Latin America. 



Bryologist, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 331-334, 1965. 

 — . Venezuelan bryophytes collected by Julian A. Steyermark. 



Acta Bot. Venezuelica, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 73-83, 1965. 



. New or little known mosses from the eastern United States. 



Bryologist, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 105-109, 1966. 

 — . The status of the moss genus Rechingcrclla. Bryologist, 



vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 112, 113, 1966. 

 Rudd, Velva E. The American species of Ormosia (Leguminosae). 



Contrib. U.S. Nat. Herb., vol. 32, pt. 5, pp. 279-384, 6 pis., 15 



figs., September 1965. 

 — . Another Mexican Dcsmarithus? Leaf!. West. Bot., vol. 10, 



no. 13, pp. 243, 244, February 1966. 

 . Acacia cochliacantha or Acacia cymbispina in Mexico? Leafl. 



West. Bot., vol. 10, no. 14, pp. 257-262, May 1966. 

 Seidenschnur, Christiane E., and Shetler, Stanwyn G. The 



botanical activities of Paul Bartsch (1871-1960). Proc. Biol. Soc. 



Washington, vol. 78, pp. 275-292, December 1965. 

 Shetler, Stanwyn G., and Montgomery, Florence. Insectivorous 



plants. Smithsonian Institution Information Leaflet No. 447, 



pp. 1-23, 1965. 




PUBLICATIONS PALEOBIOLOGY 147 



Smith, Lyman B. [Letter.] Bromeliana (Greater New York Chapt. 



Bromel. Soc), vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 26-29, May 1965. 



. Herbarium notes, II. Phytologia, vol. 12, p. 249, July 1965. 



. Tillandsia's subgenus Phytarrhiza. Bromeliana (Greater New 



York Chapt. Bromel. Soc.), vol. 2, pp. 50-53, December 1965. 

 — . Itinerary of Edouard Francois Andre in his expedition to the 



northern Andes 1875-76. Phytologia, vol. 12, pp. 401-413, 



December 1965. 

 . The great bromeliad hoax. Bromel. Soc. Bull., vol. 16, 



no. 1, pp. 4, 5, January- February 1966. 



. Notes on Bromeliaceae, XXIII. Phytologia, vol. 13, pp. 



84-161, March 1966. 



and Downs, Robert J. Xiridaceas. In Flora ilustrada 



Catarinense, pt. 1, fasc. xiri, pp. 1-54, August 1965. 

 Soderstrom, Thomas R. Gramineae. In The botany of the Guayana 



Highland— Part VI. Mem. N.Y. Bot. Gard., vol. 12, no. 3, 



pp. 1-7, 1965. 

 . Preparing a rain forest exhibit for Smithsonian's new Hall of 



Plant Life. Plant Sci. Bull., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1-3, 1965. 

 . Phylogenetic position of Piresia, a grass of the tropical Ameri- 



can rain forest (Abstract). Amer. Journ. Bot., vol. 52, no. 6, pt. 2, 

 p. 651, 1965. 



-, and Decker, Henry F. Allolepis: a new segregate of Distichlis 



(Gramineae). Madrono, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 33-39, 1965. 



Stern, William L. The scientific name of "pink ivory." Internat. 

 Wood Coll. Bull, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 89, 90, June 1966. 



Steyermark, Julian A.; Aristeguieta, Leandro; and Wurdack, 

 John J. Una neuva especie de Tapirira para Venezuela. Bol. 

 Soc. Venezolana Cienc. Nat., vol. 26, no. 109, pp. 159-162, Sep- 

 tember 1965. 



Wurdack, John J. Certamen Melastomataceis X. Phytologia, vol. 

 13, no. 2, pp. 65-80, March 1966. 



PALEOBIOLOGY 



Adey, W. H. The genus Clathromorphwn (Corallinaceae) in the Gulf 

 of Maine. Hydrobiologia, vol. 26, nos. 3-4, pp. 539-573, 1965. 



Benson, R. H. Designation of ostracode lectotypes. Journ. Paleon- 

 tology, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 745-747, 1965. 



and Kaesler, R. L. The Benson-Kaesler bolapipe dredge. 



Micropaleontology, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 369-372, 1965. 




148 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Boardman, R. S. In Doumani, G. A., et al., Lower Devonian fauna 



of the Horlick Formation, Ohio Range, Antarctica, Bryozoa. 



Antarctic Research Series, vol. 6, pp. 248-251, pi. 1, figs. 1-4, 2 



tables, 1965. 

 Buzas, M. A. The distribution and abundance of Foraminifera in 



Long Island Sound. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 149, no. 1, 89 



pp., 4 pis., 22 figs. 1965. 

 , The discrimination of morphological groups of Elphidium 



(Foraminifera) in Long Island Sound through canonical analysis 



and invariant characters. Journ. Paleontology, vol. 40, no. 3, 



pp. 585-594, 1 text-fig., 2 pis., 1966. 

 Cifelli, R. Late Tertiary planktonic Foraminifera associated with 



a basaltic boulder from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Journ. Marine 



Research, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 73-87, 1965. 

 Cifelli, R.; Bowen, V. T.; and Siever, R. Cemented foraminifera! 



oozes from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Nature, vol. 209, no. 5018, 



pp. 32-34, 1965. 

 Cooper, G. Arthur, and Phelan, Thomas. Stringocephalus in the 



Devonian of Indiana. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 151. no. 1, 



20 pp., 5 pis., 11 figs., 1966. 

 Dane, C. H.; Cobban, W. A.; and Kauffman, E. G. Stratigraphy 



and regional relationships of a reference section of the Juana 



Lopez Member, Mancos Shale, in the San Juan Basin, New 



Mexico. U.S. Geol. Survey Bull. 1224H, Contr. to Strat., 5 pp., 



3 figs., 1966. 

 Dunkle, David H., and Rahman, Habib-ur. On marine fishes from 



the Eocene of West Pakistan. Geological Survey of Pakistan, 



Prepublication Issue no. 10, June 1966. 

 Dutro, T. J. Brachiopods, in Kummel, Bernhard, and Raup, David 



eds., Handbook of paleontologica! techniques, pt. 1, General 



procedures and techniques applicable to major fossil groups, 



pp. 44-48, San Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Co., 1965. 

 . [Review] Treatise of invertebrate paleontology. Science, \ 



vol. 152, no. 3721, pp. 494-495, 1966. 



and Payne, T. G. Geologic map of Alaska, in Geologic map !] 



of North America, E. N. Goddard, chairman. U.S. Geol. Survey 



Special Map, 1965. 

 Gazin, C. Lewis. Animates prehistoricos localizados en Guatemala. 



Historia Natural y Pronatura, no. 2, pp. 4-6, 4 figs., 1965. 

 . An endocranial cast of the Bridger middle Eocene primate, 



Smilodectes gracilis. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 149, no. 4, 14 



pp., 2 pis., 1965. 




PUBLICATIONS PALEOBIOLOGY 149 



— . Early Eocene mammalian faunas and their environment in 



the vicinity of the Rock Springs Uplift, Wyoming. Wyoming 



Geological Assoc. Guidebook, Symposium on Sedimentation of 



Late Cretaceous and Tertiary Outcrops, Rock Springs Uplift, 



19th Ann. Field Conf., pp. 171-180, 1 fig., 1965. 

 Hibbard, G. W. ; Ray, C. E.; Savage, D. E.; Taylor, D. W.; and 



Guilday, J. E. Quaternary mammals of North America, hi H. E. 



Wright, Jr., and D. G. Frey (eds.), The Quaternary of the United 



States, pp. 509-525, 9 figs.), 4 tables. Princeton Univ. Press, 1965. 

 Johnson, J. H., and Adey, W. H. Studies of Lithophyllum and related 



algal genera. Quart. Colorado School Mines, vol. 60, no. 2, 



pp. 1-105, 1965. 

 Kauffman, E. G. Middle and late Turonian oysters of the Lopha 



lugubris group. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 148, no. 6, 92 pp., 



8 pis., 18 figs., 5 tables, 1965. 

 . Taxonomic, ecologic and evolutionary significance of interior 



shell morphology in the Inoceramidae (Mesozoic Bivalvia) [Ab- 

 stract], Geol. Soc. America, Ann. Meeting, 1 p., 1965. 

 Kauffman, E. G., and McCulloch, D. S. Biota of a late glacial 



Rocky Mountain pond. Geol. Soc. America Bull., vol. 76, pp. 



1203-1232, 5 figs., 2 pis., 1965. 

 Kellogg, Remington. Fossil marine mammals from the Miocene 



Calvert formation of Maryland and Virginia. U.S. Nat. Mus. 



Bull. 247, pts. 1 and 2, pp. 1-63, pis. 1-32, October 1965. 

 Kier, P. M. Evolutionary trends in Paleozoic echinoids. Journ. 



Paleontology, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 436-465, pis. 55-60, 26 text-figs., 



1965. 

 and Grant, R. E. Echinoid distribution and habits, Key 



Largo Coral Reef Preserve, Florida. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., 



vol. 149, no. 6, 66 pp., 16 pis., 15 figs., 1965. 

 Pierce, J. W. Sedimentology Program at the Museum of Natural 



History, Smithsonian Institution. In Interagency Conference on 



Continental Research, U.S. Army, Coastal Eng. Res. Center, 



Misc. Paper 1-66, pp. 9-11, 1966. 

 . Sediment budget of a part of the North Carolina coast 



[Abstract]. Program of 1966 Annual Meeting, Southeastern 



Section, Geol. Soc. of America. 

 , and Good, Donald I. FORTRAN II Program for standard 



size analysis of unconsolidated sediments using an IBM 1620 



computer. Kansas Geol. Surv., Spec. Distrib. Publ. 28, 19 pp., 



1966. 



230-457—66 13 




150 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Rasetti, Franco. Upper Cambrian trilobites of the Pleasant Hill 



Formation in central Pennsylvania. Journ. Paleontology, vol. 



39, no. 5, pp. 1007-1014, pis. 119-120, 1965. 



— . New Lower Cambrian trilobite faunule from the Taconic 



Sequence of New York. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 148, no. 



9, 52 pp., 12 pis., 1966. 

 Ray, Clayton E. A glyptodont from South Carolina. Charleston 



Mus. Leaflet no. 27, pp. 1-12, pis. 1-4, 1965. 

 . A new chipmunk, Tamias aristus, from the Pleistocene of 



Georgia. Journ. Paleontology, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1016-1022, 



1 fig., 1965. 

 . Variation in the number of marginal tooth positions in three 



species of iguanid lizards. Mus. Comp. Zool. Breviora, no. 236, 

 15 pp., 5 figs., 1965. 



Ray, Clayton E. The identity of Bison appalachicolus. Notulae 

 Naturae, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia., no. 384, 7 pp., 2 figs., 

 May 1966. 



Rorher, W. L., and Gazin, C. Lewis. Gray Bull and Lysite faunal 

 zones of the Willwood Formation in the Tatman Mountain area, 

 Bighorn Basin, Wyoming. In Geological Survey Research 1965, 

 U.S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 525-D, pp. D 133-D 138, 1966. 



Ross, R. J., Jr., and Dutro, T. J. Silicified Ordovician brachiopods 

 from east-central Alaska. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 149, no. 

 7, 22 pp., 3 pis., 1 fig., 1966. 



Towe, K. M. Carbon films for electron microscopy: A reliable 

 method for stripping from glass surfaces. Rev. Sci. Instruments, 

 vol. 36, no. 8, p. 1247, 1965. 



and Cifelli, R. Aspects of wall ultrastructure in some hyaline 



foraminifera [Abstract]. Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petroleum Geol., 

 vol. 49, no. 3, p. 638, 1966. 



Utgaard, John and Boardman, R. S. Heterotrypa Nicholson, 1879, 

 and Peronopora Nicholson, 1881 (Bryozoa, Trepostomata) : Pro- 

 posed designation of a type-species in conformity with generally 

 accepted usage. Bull. Zool. Nomencl., vol. 22, pt. 2, pp. 112-118, 

 1965. 



MINERAL SCIENCES 



Buseck, P. R. ; Mason, B. ; and Wiik, H. B. The Farmington meteorite. 



Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, vol. 30, pp. 1-8, 1966. 

 Clarke, R. S., Jr.; Wosinski, J. F.; Marvin, R. R.; and Friedman I. 



Potassium-argon ages of artificial tektite glass [Abstract]. Trans. 



Amer. Geophys. Union, vol. 47, p. 144, 1966. 




PUBLICATIONS MINERAL SCIENCES 151 



Desautels, Paul E. Interaction between light and minerals. 

 Natural History, vol. 74, No. 8, pp. 52-57, October 1965. 



Donnay, G.; Mason, B.; and Ingamells, C. O. Buergerite, a new 

 species of tourmaline. Amer. Mineral., vol. 51, pp. 198-199, 1966. 



Fredriksson, K. Standards and correction procedures for micro- 

 probe analysis of minerals [Abstract]. IV e Congres International 

 sur l'Optique des Rayons X et la Microanalyse. Faculte des 

 Sciences, Orsay, 1965. 



and Reid, A. A chondrule in the Chainpur meteorite. Sci- 

 ence, vol. 149, pp. 856-860, 1965. 



Mason, B. The geochemical behavior of some elements in meteorites. 

 Probl. of Geochemistry, pp. 72-80, 1965. 



. The enstatite chondrites. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, vol. 



30, pp. 22-39, 1966. 



. Geochemistry and meteorites. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 



vol. 30, pp. 365-374, 1966. 

 . Memorial to Mark Chance Bandy. Bull. Geol. Soc. Amer., 



vol. 77, pp. 13-16, 1966. 



Melson, W. G. Phase equilibria in calc-silicate hornfels, Lewis and 

 Clark County, Montana. Amer. Mineral., vol. 51, nos. 3 and 4, 

 pp. 402-421, 1966. 



, Bowen, V. T. ; van Andel, Tj. H.; and Siever, R. Green- 

 stones from the central Valley of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Nature, 

 vol. 209, pp. 604-605, 1966. 



and Switzer, G., Plagioclase-spinel-graphite xenoliths in 



metallic iron-bearing basalts, Disko Island, Greenland. Amer. 



Mineral., vol. 51, nos. 5 and 6, 14 pp. 1966. 

 Olsen, E., and Fredriksson, K. Phosphates in iron and pallasite 



meteorites. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, vol. 30, pp. 459-470, 



1966. 

 Wine, H. B., and Mason, B. Analyses of eight iron meteorites. 



Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, vol. 29, pp. 1003-1005, 1965. 





National Zoological Park 



Theodore H. Reed, Director 



T7<or the National Zoological Park, the year ending June 30, 1966, 

 -*■ was in many ways remarkable. The construction program moved 

 ahead methodically, a scientific research department was established, 

 additional emphasis was placed on conservation, and the breeding 

 of exotic species added notably to the value of the animal collection. 

 The collection continued to grow in zoological breadth and diversity. 

 Gifts, births, purchases, and exchanges have enhanced public interest 

 in and the scientific usefulness of the Zoo. The following summary of 

 the animals on hand on June 30 shows the greatest number of species 

 and of individual animals since the retirement of Dr. William M. 

 Mann in 1956. 



153 




154 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Births 



For the first time in the Zoo's long history, a baby orangutan was 

 born. Previously, two gorillas, numerous chimpanzees, and gibbons 

 had been raised here, so it was gratifying to have the fourth species 

 of great ape reproduce. The Zoo had long had a trio of orangutans — 

 Butch, Susie, and Jennie — but perhaps because they had all been 

 brought up together from childhood there may have been a sibling 

 relationship — in any event they never bred. The Toronto Zoo had 

 a magnificent specimen named Archie, 10 years old and a proven sire, 

 which they offered to exchange for a young male gorilla. Accordingly 

 Leonard, the second gorilla born here, was dispatched to Toronto, 

 and the National Zoo acquired Archie, a dynamic personality, big, 

 with great cheek callosities and masses of long red hair. On April 2 

 Jennie gave birth to a fine healthy male, who has been named Atjeh 

 for the province of northern Sumatra where wild orangs occur. Jennie 



Note: Certain tabulated, statistical, and other information previously given in the 

 report of the National Zoological Park in Smithsonian Tear now appears as appendices 

 to the Separate of this Report (available on request from the Director of the Na- 

 tional Zoological Park). This information includes: 

 Visitor statistics and other operational information. 



Report of the veterinary, augmented by case histories and autopsy reports. 

 Complete lists of: (a) animals in the collection on June 30, 1966; (b) all births 

 and hatchings during the year; (c) changes in the collection by gift, purchase, 

 or exchange. 



has proved to be a good parent, and visitors enjoy watching mother 

 and baby, although during its first months about all they could see as 

 she cradled the baby in her arms, was its small coconut-like head with 

 its sparse red hair. Susie is also believed to be pregnant. Butch, by 

 the way, was loaned to the Boston Zoo, where he promptly mated with 

 their female. 



The Zoo in previous years had good success in breeding Nubian 

 giraffes, and offspring had been sent to other zoos; but the original 

 breeding stock, brought to the Zoo in 1937 by the Smithsonian In- 

 stitution — National Geographic Society Expedition, had died, and 

 none had been born since January 1957. Consequently, a trio of 

 young giraffes was ordered from Africa, and in 1962 two Masai giraffes, 

 Myrt and Marg, arrived, the male having died at sea. Not until the 

 following year was the Zoo able to obtain a male, named Michael- 

 John after the young son of the collector, Tony Parkinson. Then 

 began the long wait for the animals to attain maturity. On May 27 

 Cecelia, the first offspring of the new herd, was born. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 155 



One of the season's unusual Zoo babies was a soulful-eyed California 

 sea lion rejected by its mother, and in consequence hand-reared by 

 Mrs. Jan Davis, medical technologist. For the first two days the baby 

 was fed by stomach tube; on the third day Mrs. Davis persuaded it 

 to accept a bottle. The formula used was — 



1 cup Esbilac, 



2 cups of water, 



4 chopped smelt (minus the heads). 

 The mixture was run through a blender and then sieved to remove 

 rough bits of skin or fin. The infant weighed 14 pounds at birth; 

 at 2 weeks it had gained 4 pounds, 2 ounces, and the formula had been 

 strengthened to — - 



1 cup Esbilac, 



\y 2 cups of water, 



8 chopped smelt (no heads), 



1 teaspoon cod liver oil. 

 The mixture was still blended and sieved, and 4 drops of viDaylin T 

 vitamin were added to the bottle. The little sea lion drank 18 ounces 

 of it every two hours during the day but was not fed at night. Four 

 sea lions have been raised in the National Zoo in the past, but this was 

 the first time one had been bottle-raised. 



Baby sea lions must be taught to swim. They are born on land 

 and the mother takes her offspring to a shallow tidal pool to introduce 

 it to the water. The Zoo's baby, known as Loo-Seal, was given her 

 first swimming lesson when she was four weeks old in the indoor 

 hippopotamus pool scrubbed and filled with clean water for the lesson. 

 When Dr. Gray and Mrs. Davis first took the young animal into the 

 water, it promptly sank to the bottom, but in a surprisingly short 

 fifteen or twenty minutes it got the idea, and swam swiftly if sometimes 

 awkwardly back and forth between its foster parents with obvious 

 enjoyment. The lessons were continued until Loo-Seal was completely 

 at home in the water. 



The Africian lions Caesar and Princess produced their 24th cub in 

 their eighth litter. The parents are now growing old ; they have been 

 here since 1953 and their age is estimated to be 15 years. The Zoo 

 plans to keep the new little lion and eventually to use him for breeding, 

 hence he has been named Augustus, a fitting name for a successor to 

 Caesar. 



The Zoo has long enjoyed a good record for breeding pygmy hippo- 

 potamuses. The male, Totota, has sired 1 1 offspring since his arrival in 

 1960, the most recent being born to a female sent here from another zoo 

 to be bred. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature 

 puts the pygmy hippo on the endangered species list, and every effort 




156 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



is being made to continue the reproduction of the species in captivity. 



Nile hippopotamuses, a bighorn sheep, and brindled gnus were also 

 born during the year. In the bird department, a second-generation 

 pair of kookaburras reared their young, and black-necked swans were 

 hatched. A Brazilian tapir, the first born here in many years, arrived 

 in October in an outside enclosure. Looking something like an 

 animated watermelon in her black and white stripes, she was soon to be 

 seen waddling happily in the erstwhile beaver pond. 



Mohini, the white tiger, had her second litter — one stillborn cub, one 

 healthy, both of the normal orange color, but a tragic outbreak of 

 panleukopenia (feline distemper) in the lion house in August caused 

 the death of two of Mohini's first three cubs, including the white one, 

 before it could be brought under control. 



Through a grant from the National Institutes of Health, the Zoo 

 obtained additional closed-circuit television equipment and a TV tape 

 recorder, and was able to record the births of Mohini's cubs, the 

 giraffe, and the Nile hippopotamus. The tapes will be valuable in 

 future studies of animal behavior. 



Throughout the year efforts were made to obtain animals to pair 

 with single ones in the collection. Mates were obtained for 25 mam- 

 mals and birds, five of which are on the endangered species list. 



Exchanges 



In October 1965 zoologist Marion P. McCrane personally escorted 

 a male pygmy hippopotamus and four Virginia white-tailed deer to 

 the National Zoological Gardens in Pretoria, South Africa. While in 

 South Africa she had an opportunity to visit zoos, museums, aquariums, 

 game reserves and national parks. She returned with animals given in 

 exchange by the Pretoria Zoo: a pair of aardwolves, the first at the 

 Zoo in 35 years; a male serval to mate with two females already in the 

 collection (seven kittens have been born since his arrival); a caracal; 

 a pair of black-footed cats, the first ever exhibited here; suricates; 

 flightless rails, and two rare species of parrot — Meyer's and the Cape 

 parrot, never exhibited here before. 



Gifts 



An unusually welcome gift came from Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, who 

 on January 12 received the Distinguished Service Award of the Na- 

 tional Wildlife Federation. The award was accompanied by a check 

 for $1000, which she graciously gave to the National Zoological Park 

 for the bcautification of the Connecticut Avenue vehicular entrance. 




At her first peek at the big hippo pool, 

 Loo-Seal gets encouragement from veteri- 

 narian Clinton W. Gray. 



an eager pupil and takes to water 

 a — sea lion. 



A DAY IN THE LIFE 



OF A BABY SEA LION 





Some buoying up. more encouragement 



}v£ftg^JL 



-*- 



and she's soloiiw on her own 



-*v 



ops! 



'hi eh rales an affectionate "Well done/" from 

 Mrs. Davis. (Photos in left column by Frank 

 Hoy, Washington Post; right column by Randolph 

 Routt, \ Washington Evening Star.) 




IPPUpqipniH 



Top left: Black-footed cat (F^/u 

 nigripes) of South Africa, one of the 

 smallest and rarest felines. The pads 

 of its feet are jet black. Left center: 

 Aardwolf {Protcles cristatus), one of a 

 pair from the National Zoological 

 Gardens of South Africa, in Pretoria. 

 The bushy tail and back crest of this 

 member of the hyena family caused 

 the Boers to call it the "maned 

 jackal." Lower left: Cecelia, female 

 Masai giraffe, is the first giraffe born 

 at the Zoo since 1957. Above: One 

 of three serval kittens hand-reared by 

 Mrs. Janet Davis, medical technolo- 

 gist in the animal hospital, sits on top 

 of the new closed-circuit TV tape- 

 recording equipment. 




New animals from Madagascar. Top: Ring-tailed mongooses {Galidia eiegans), 

 or vontsiras, the first of these rare viverrines ever exhibited here. Above left: 

 A pair of rare fanalokas (Fossa fossa), the Zoo's first, are found only on the 

 island. They were acquired along with other prized Madagascar fauna by 

 resident scientist John Eisenberg. Above right: Gloves protect hands from 

 the sharp prickly spines of this large Madagascar hedgehog (Setifer setosus). 

 Below: A lesser Oriental civet (Viverricula indica), introduced on the island 

 many years ago. 



S****3fK .***■-■ 




-' : 



Top left: Caroline, first Brasilian tapir 

 (Tapirus terrestris) born at the Zoo in many 

 years. It was named for Miss Caroline 

 Jarvis of the Zoological Society of London, 

 editor of the International Zoo Yearbook 

 (photo by Tom Kelley, Washington Post). 

 Top right: One of the smaller Madagascar 

 chameleons {Chamaeleo lateralis). Right: First 

 orangutan born in the National Zoo and 

 mother Jennie. Named Atjeh by Smith- 

 sonian Secretary S. Dillon Ripley for a 

 province in Sumatra where orangutans 

 occur. The Zoo has now successfully bred 

 all four kinds of great apes — -gibbons, 

 orangutans, chimpanzees, and gorillas. 



if ■ ! 



Below: The Zoo's nucleus herd of sitka deer in one of eight shady paddocks 

 in the Deer Area, near the Connecticut Avenue pedestrian entrance. Com- 

 pleted in November 1965, the area is gradually being stocked. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 157 



Mrs. Johnson visited the Zoo and consulted with the director, the 

 engineer, and the head gardener. The planting at this entrance has 

 now been completed. 



The largest gift of the year was a collection of tropical birds from 

 Woodward & Lothrop, a Washington department store. The birds, 

 collected in Central and South America and West Africa by Kerry 

 Muller, manager of the Zoo's bird division, and George Payne, dis- 

 play manager for the store, were used for a month-long "fashion on 

 the wing" display. Crowds came to see the brightly lighted store 

 windows, where stately flamingos, roseate spoonbills, iridescent sun- 

 birds, and sugar birds appeared in natural-habitat settings. At the 

 end of the month the whole collection, including many rare species and 

 numbering 436 birds, was presented to the National Zoo. 



Another spectacular collection, consisting of 65 birds of 42 species, 

 was given to the Zoo by the artist Edward Marshall Boehm, noted for 

 his ceramic figures of birds. All were valuable, but outstanding were 

 the dusky lory, Vaal River white eye, Australian fairy blue wren, 

 pavonine trogon, and Coleto starling. 



A magnificent hyacinthine macaw named "Gainsborough" was 

 given the Zoo by Princess Belosselsky of New York. This species of 

 macaw had not been exhibited here for many years. 



The gifts of birds mentioned above were especially appreciated in 

 view of the recently remodeled bird house and the great outdoor flight 

 cage opened to the public on July 18, 1965. This soaring, imaginative, 

 walk-through aviary has been extremely popular with visitors, who 

 now can stroll past splashing waterfalls and landscaped shrubbery 

 while they watch the birds close at hand, with no barriers between 

 people and the flash of wings. 



The U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit no. 3 in Cairo, Egypt, 

 through the efforts of Dr. Harry Hoogstraal, a long-time friend of the 

 Zoo, collected and shipped a number of interesting reptiles and other 

 animals. 



Research 



Recognizing the importance of the original Congressional mandate 

 establishing the National Zoological Park "for the advancement of 

 science," the Zoo throughout its history has made many contributions 

 to scientific knowledge. The emphasis on science was strengthened 

 by the formal organization last year of a division of research and by 

 the appointment on September 1, 1965, of Dr. John F. Eisenberg as 

 resident scientist. The staff of the research division also includes 

 Mrs. Wyotta Holden as secretary and Eugene Maliniak as assistant. 

 The latter has been for many years in charge of the small mammal house 




158 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



and has a keen interest in small mammals. Temporary research 

 facilities have been constructed in the basement of the lion house. 



Eisenberg also serves as research associate professor at University 

 of Maryland department of zoology, which is headed by Dr. George 

 Anastos, and there he offers graduate courses and supervises a graduate 

 research program. 



During the past year Eisenberg presented research papers at the 

 International Ethological Congress in Zurich, at the University College 

 at Nairobi, and at the 1 966 meeting of the American Society of Mam- 

 malogists. He submitted for publication two research papers: "The 

 Behavior of Ateles geoffroyi and Related Species" and "Notes on the 

 Ecology, Behavior, and Reproduction of Some Tenrecoid Insectivores." 



From January through April 1966, Eisenberg participated as co- 

 investigator with Edwin Gould of Johns Hopkins University in an 

 ecological and behavioral study of the tenrecoid insectivores of 

 Madagascar. From his field camp there he was able to send to the 

 Zoo a number of fine specimens, including a fossa (Cryptoprocta ferox), 

 the second of the only two specimens ever exhibited in the United 

 States, both at the National Zoo. The new acquisition is thought to 

 be the only one now on exhibit in any zoo in the world. Other valuable 

 additions to the collection are a pair of fanalokas (Fossa fossa) and three 

 vontsiras, or Madagascar ring-tailed mongooses (Galidia elegans), which 

 have never been seen in the Zoo before. All of these are members of the 

 family Viverridae. In addition, 25 living specimens of tenrec of 7 

 different species were sent back to the Zoo. Most of them will be kept 

 in the research division for further studies. This field work has resulted 

 in the first basic ecological data for several genera of tenrecs, including 

 the greater hedgehog tenrec (Setifer setosus), the lowland streaked tenrec 

 (Hemicentetes semispinosus), and the highland streaked tenrec (H. nigriceps). 

 In addition, range extensions for Fossa fossa and H. nigriceps were 

 established. 



For the murine opossum {Marmosa sp.) and the hedgehog tenrec 

 (Echinops telfairi) the gestation period, on the basis of three pregnancies, 

 was determined by Maliniak and Eisenberg to be less than 17 days for 

 the opossum and 62 to 68 days for the tenrec. The tiny murine 

 opossum, unlike the common opossum, has no pouch, and the numerous 

 young, as many as 18 in a litter, can be seen hanging to the mother 

 like a bunch of grapes. 

 Current research projects at the National Zoological Park are : 



1 . Studies of thermoregulation and hibernation in the tenrecs of 

 the genera Microgale, Hemic entetes, Setifer, Echinops, and Centetes (with 

 E. Maliniak). 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 159 



2. Social behavior of microtine rodents under varying population 

 densities (with G. McKay). 



3. Studies of social behavior and communications in the marmoset 

 species Saguinus oedipus and S. geoffroyi (= spixii) (with Miss N. Mucken- 

 hirn) . 



4. Studies on the social behavior and on the ontogeny of behavior 

 among selected species of Caviomorph rodents (with N. Smythe). 



5. Basic studies on the behavior of mammals during parturition 

 (in conjunction with Dr. Clinton W. Gray). 



Information and Education 



The information and education section, continuing its sign and label 

 making program, completed 437 animal identification labels, 167 sup- 

 porting signs (safety, building and construction signs, etc.), and 

 232 other visual information projects. Natural history and Park 

 information were disseminated by telephone and correspondence. 

 Guided tours were conducted for groups of handicapped children, 

 for classes from schools and colleges, personnel from other zoos, and 

 for special guests and dignitaries. 



In addition to these activities, the section handled public relations 

 (press, radio, television, etc.), prepared articles and literature Re- 

 publication and distribution, and provided liaison between the Zoo 

 and volunteer groups interested in aiding it. 



The information and education section and the veterinary section 

 collaborated with the National Educational Television Association in 

 the production of a 30-minute educational TV program on zoo veteri- 

 nary medicine, to be aired in late summer or early fall, 1966. 



Friends of the National Zoo 



The Friends of the National Zoo continued their interest and 

 helpfulness. Their education committee, with the assistance and 

 cooperation of the Zoo's section on information and education, pre- 

 pared an information brochure on the Zoo and an educational aid 

 packet for distribution in the District school system and to all interested 

 groups. This was something the Zoo had long needed and has met 

 with a welcome response from teachers in District of Columbia elemen- 

 tary public schools. 



The Friends were invited to a preview of the great flight cage on 

 the evening of July 17, and held their annual meeting and election of 

 officers in the Zoo cafeteria on April 28. 




160 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Construction and Improvements 



In fiscal year 1966 the Smithsonian Institution Appropriation Act 

 contained an item of $1,539,000 for capital improvements at the 

 National Zoological Park, including a hospital-research building and 

 service buildings (mechanical shop, automotive garage, property supply 

 building, and greenhouse). 



A landscape architect was engaged last year at the recommendation 

 of the Fine Arts Commission to restudy the entire master plan, and 

 design and construction of the hospital-research-service area have been 

 delayed until preliminary phases of the restudy are completed. The 

 designs for these buildings, completed by architect Alan Jacobs, have 

 been approved by the Fine Arts Commission and the National Capital 

 Planning Commission, and construction is expected to begin in late 

 fall 1966. 



On the recommendation of the Fine Arts Commission, the area 

 south and east from the location of the proposed giraffe house (the 

 present artificial "sheep mound") to Rock Creek is to be designed as 

 a unified plan, including landscaping and exterior architecture. 

 Upon approval of preliminary (feasibility) plans, the detailed plans and 

 construction designs of the multiclimate house for this area will proceed. 



On June 13 the President of the United States, using his authority 

 under the Reorganization Act, sent to Congress Reorganization Plan 

 No. 4 of 1966, in accordance with the Reorganization Act of 1949. 

 This plan will transfer the responsibility for construction within the 

 Zoo from the District of Columbia to the Smithsonian Institution. 



In preparation for this transfer the General Services Administration 

 has, at the request of the District of Columbia, already taken over 

 the administration of the present design contract and will in the future 

 supervise construction in the Zoo. 



Construction continues within the Zoo. The great flight cage was 

 completed and opened to the public on July 18. Almost a third of the 

 exhibition area has been under construction. Parking lot F, near the 

 waterfowl pond, was completed and was accepted on September 16, 

 1965. It accommodates 260 automobiles and 24 buses. The new 

 electrical transformer station was completed, and installation of the 

 electrical switch gear is underway. The new gas-fired boiler at the 

 bird house was completed and placed in service. 



The trunk sewers and retention basin, authorized under the Phase II 

 program, were started on January 4, 1966, and will undoubtedly be 

 completed on schedule. The present exhibition of sea lions and canines, 

 the beaver pool, and the silver gull cage have been withdrawn from 

 public exhibition during the sewer construction. 




NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 161 



The deer area, consisting of 6 exhibition paddocks and 2 reserve 

 paddocks, served by 5 houses, was completed and accepted in 

 November. There was some work to be completed by the Zoo staff 

 and because of inclement weather animals were not moved in until 

 early spring. Dedication will take place at the same time as the hoofed- 

 stock areas. This area, with its large trees, shady hillsides, and wander- 

 ing paths gives a most pleasant effect of a private deer park. Because 

 of the hilly terrain, moats could not be used, but overlooks are placed 

 along the path where visitors may look out and down over the deer. 

 In cases where fencing was necessary, a special, inconspicuous wire 

 mesh was used. Construction continued on the hardy and delicate 

 hoofed-stock areas. 



The Department of the Interior, National Capital Parks, Rock 

 Creek Parkway project (which includes the Zoo by-pass, the tunnel 

 under Administration Hill, the Harvard Street overpass into the Zoo, 

 and the North Parking lot) are nearing completion and are scheduled 

 to be completed early in fall 1966. 



Beautification of the Zoo grounds, under the direction of head 

 gardener John Monday, continued with the planting of 20 trees, 2300 

 evergreens, 50 shrubs, 3000 bulbs, and 3500 annuals and perennials. 

 The inside of the new flight cage and the new parking lot "F" were 

 landscaped with evergreens. Bulbs, annuals and perennials were used 

 in flower beds throughout the Park, giving them color for most months 

 of the year. Many bare areas in the Park were seeded, and 400 yards 

 of sod put in where seed would have been impractical. 



The work of the department also included a constant watch for dead 

 wood that might be dangerous to visitors, employees or animals; felling 

 dead trees and trimming others; cutting perches for birds and animals 

 and supplying browsers with foliage. 



230-457— GO 14 





Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute 



Martin H. Moynihan, Director 



'""T'he new name "Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute," replacing 

 •*■ the previous "Canal Zone Biological Area," indicates how the 

 activities and responsibilities of the bureau are increasing and becoming 

 broader in scope. This development, begun some years ago, in 1966 

 was marked by the inauguration of several new major programs. The 

 Institute is now fully engaged in both research and in education and 

 training, as well as in certain aspects of conservation. 



Facilities 



The opening of two marine biology laboratories, one on Naos Island 

 (Fort Amador) on the Pacific coast and the other on Galeta Island on 

 the Atlantic coast, certainly was the outstanding event of the past year. 

 The Naos Island facilities include the "bunker laboratory" and another 

 large building (provisionally referred to as "building T-332"). The 

 bunker laboratory is completely operational, with a running salt-water 

 system, series of small aquaria, and equipment for behavioral and 

 ecological studies of small to medium size marine organisms. Work is 

 still in progress on building T-332, in which is a series of large tanks, 

 29' x 23' x 8' deep, that will be provided with running sea water and 

 will be used for studies of large and/or pelagic organisms. The Galeta 

 Island building, also being remodelled, will eventually provide much 

 the same range of facilities as the bunker laboratory. These new 



163 




164 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



marine facilities are available for use by visiting scientists and students 

 in the same way as the Barro Colorado laboratory. 



The existing living accommodations and laboratory were improved 

 during the year, and some additional living quarters are being con- 

 structed. The Tropical Research Institute also acquired title to 

 Orchid Island and two small islets off Buena Vista Point, near the 

 shore of Barro Colorado. It is planned to preserve the native fauna 

 and flora of these islands ; but they will also be used for certain experi- 

 mental programs such as the introduction of certain exotic species of 

 mammals from other parts of the tropics. 



Research and Publication 



Most of the subjects investigated by scientists of the Tropical Research 

 Institute staff (permanent resident scientists and graduate student 

 interns) fall into the fields of evolution, social behavior, communication, 

 species diversity, and zoogeography. Unless specifically noted other- 

 wise, this research was supported from federal funds appropriated to 

 the Smithsonian Institution. 



A. Stanley Rand's studies of the ecology and behavior of iguanid 

 lizards are providing information on the various ways in which species 

 can partition environmental resources. Among the special topics he 

 investigated were nest site competition in Iguana iguana, selective forces 

 affecting egg type and clutch size in tropical reptiles in general, 

 patterns of distribution of West Indian anoles on small islands, and the 

 social organization and spatial distribution of Anolis lineatopas in 

 Panama. Rand also expanded his investigation of vocal communica- 

 tion in the frog Engystomops pustulosis. The repertory of the species 

 has been cataloged, and considerable progress has been made in 

 identifying the information encoded in the system. In a paper 

 presented at the Symposium on the Biota of the Amazon, held in 

 Belem, Brazil,* Rand presented a double hypothesis which may help to 

 explain in part the extreme species diversity in the tropics. He sug- 

 gested that the formation of search images by predators, in the prey 

 recognition process, produces selection pressure in favor of diversity of 

 appearance in prey species, and that this pressure is maximal in complex 

 environments with many species of both predators and prey. 



Neal G. Smith studied the evolution of adaptations to brood para- 

 sitism by certain species of cuckoos, cowbirds and flycatchers, and the 

 counter-adaptations of their hosts. These adaptations may include 



*His travel was partly supported by the Association for Tropical Biology. 




TROPICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE 165 



elaborate egg mimicry, and behavioral, morphological, and physio- 

 logical polymorphism, and must be due to a delicate balance of 

 conflicting selection pressures. Progress has been made in identifying 

 some of the selective forces involved. He also is making an experi- 

 mental analysis of the factors governing the diversity of bird species in 

 tropical grasslands. 



Many species of cuckoos are divided into distinct infra-specific 

 li egg clans" called "gentes." The females of each subgroup lay eggs 

 which differ in appearance (size, shape, color) from those of other 

 subgroups of the same species. In the cuckoos that Smith is studying, 

 females of a particular gens place their distinctive eggs in the nests 

 of hosts which lay eggs of similar size, color, and pattern. During 

 the past year, Smith was able to elucidate one of the major proximate 

 factors governing egg color discontinuity. The color differences are 

 the result of the length of time that the egg remains in the uterus. 

 This, in turn, is controlled by a hormone similar to oxytosin. By 

 appropriate administration of this hormone and other compounds, 

 Smith was able to induce marked changes in the color of the eggs laid 

 by free-living cuckoos. This technique has proved useful in determin- 

 ing the perceptual limitations which influence a host's ability to dis- 

 criminate between its own eggs and those of other species. 



Ira Rubinoff continued studies of the development of reproductive 

 isolating mechanisms between allopatric species of Bathygobius from 

 the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of Panama. He began an experimental 

 program, partly supported by a grant from the National Science 

 Foundation to Harvard University, that includes attempts at inter- 

 specific forced matings as well as controlled artificial hybridization of 

 species which have been geographically separated for 6 to 8 million 

 years. He presented a paper on geminate species of marine fishes at the 

 meetings of the American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists. 



In order to trace the movements of species from ocean to ocean and/ 

 or from marine waters into Gatun Lake, Rubinoff, assisted by various 

 members of the staff, collected fishes stranded in the Gatun Locks of 

 the Panama Canal when the locks were drained for overhaul. There 

 have been remarkably few studies of this subject in previous years, and 

 Rubinoff intends to continue sampling the fishes in the locks whenever 

 opportunities arise. 



Director Martin Moynihan continued his study, largely supported 

 by a grant from the National Science Foundation, of geographic 

 variation in social behavior among Andean birds. Observations over 

 the last five years have revealed that different populations of the same 

 species of birds have very different social reactions in different parts 




166 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



of the Andes. These variations, certainly not random, are strictly 

 correlated with geographic parameters of the regions inhabited. Dif- 

 ferent species have adapted (or reacted) to the same parameters in 

 different ways. The study of these phenomena is beginning to yield 

 a considerable amount of new information about the basic advantages 

 and disadvantages of different types of social systems. It should 

 increase our understanding of both the distribution of species and the 

 natural regulation of population size. 



Moynihan also continued his comparative study of communication 

 (acoustic, visual, olfactory, and tactile) in the monkeys, tamarins, 

 and marmosets of tropical America. These closely related species, 

 a relatively small group, are remarkable in occupying a great variety 

 of ecological niches and in using very different types of "language." 

 The functional significance of these different types is being elucidated 

 by detailed analyses of the structures of the patterns used in the lan- 

 guages and their correlation with different environments and ways of 

 life. The results contribute to an understanding of the philosophical 

 and logical aspects of communication in general, and the evolution 

 of communication systems in all primates, including man. 



Robert L. Dressier, on leave for most of the past year, served as 

 executive director of the central office of the Association for Tropical 

 Biology. In spite of his heavy administrative duties (including 

 organization of the Symposium on the Biota of the Amazon), he 

 continued research, supported by a grant from the National Science 

 Foundation, on pollination relationships in the Orchidaceae, especially 

 the relations between orchids of the subtribe Stanhopeinae and bees of 

 the tribe Euglossini. Male bees of this tribe, attracted by odor, visit 

 the orchids in order to gather some substance from the surface of the 

 flowers. Little is known, however, about the nature of the substance 

 gathered, or its role in the biology of the bees (although there is some 

 evidence that the male bees die if deprived of it for approximately 1 2 

 days). That the bees are the exclusive pollinators of the orchids has 

 been definitely established. They also are highly specific in their 

 visits; most species of orchids are visited by only one or a few species 

 of bees. Thus, the adaptations which the orchids have evolved to 

 attract the "correct" kind, or kinds, of bees supply the principal 

 isolating mechanism between sympatric congeneric species. This 

 type of breeding system has the advantage of favoring out-crossing, 

 even when individual plants are widely scattered- 

 Michael H. Robinson analysed the antipredator adaptations of some 

 1 5 species of stick-and-leaf mimicking insects. Among the adaptations 

 studied were special protective resemblances (homotypy), startle 

 displays, the production of repellent secretions, and generalized escape 




TROPICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE 167 



behavior. The efficacy of these devices was tested by using captive 

 tamarins (Saguinus geqffroyi) as experimental predators. The curious 

 "rocking movements" made by many stick-and-leaf mimicking insects 

 have been considered to be a challenge to selection theory, since they 

 may render an otherwise concealed insect highly conspicuous to a 

 human observer. Robinson's experiments suggest that these move- 

 ments are really a behavioral extension of the morphological mimicry, 

 and that predators hunting in a natural environment do not respond 

 to them because they resemble the passive wind-induced movements 

 of non-edible objects, such as twigs and leaves. In the course of his 

 experiments, Robinson also collected information on the behavior of 

 the tamarins with respect to prey-recognition, searching patterns, and 

 methods of prey-capture and eating. 



Nicholas D. Smythe began a study of the ecology and behavior 

 of the large caviomorph rodents inhabiting tropical forests. These 

 animals are particularly interesting because they are similar in some 

 aspects of morphology and ecology to such small ungulates as the 

 Old World chevrotains and the small forest antelopes of Africa. (They 

 also bear a remarkable superficial resemblance to some primitive and 

 extinct forms, such as Eohippus.) Different species of these caviomorphs 

 have rather different types of social systems, and Smythe hopes to be 

 able to explain the functional significance of these differences by de- 

 termining their correlations with particular features of the ecology 

 of the species concerned. He has been paying special attention to the 

 agouti Dasyprocta punctata and the paca Agouti paca, both of which are 

 common on Barro Colorado Island and in many other parts of the Canal 

 Zone and the Republic of Panama. He observed their behavior in the 

 wild (recording with automatic cameras many intra- and inter-specific 

 encounters), and began experimental investigation of some reactions in 

 the laboratory. He also made a special study of the fruits eaten by these 

 species, the effects of different distributions of fruiting trees and fruiting 

 times upon the movements of the rodents, and the possible "reciprocal" 

 effects of the activities of the rodents on the distribution of the trees. 



Eugene Morton, was primarily concerned with the environmental 

 factors affecting the evolution of acoustic communication in birds. He 

 recorded the calls of individual species characteristic of mature forest, 

 dense "edge" and second-growth forest, grasslands, and the environs of 

 rapid-flowing streams, analyzed the physical characteristics of these 

 sounds, and then determined their function as signals. He also 

 recorded ambient background sounds for use in signal-to-noise ratio 

 calculations that will enable him to identify the frequencies most 

 conveniently available for communication purposes. In his study of 

 the general sound propagation characteristics of the four environments 




168 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



cited above, he is using pure tones and random noise bands at ^-octave 

 intervals up to 15 kc. to determine sound attenuation per unit distance 

 from the sound source. This will be compared with attenuation of 

 sound under "standard" conditions of air density, temperature, etc. 

 (One rather surprising result has already emerged: certain ranges of 

 frequencies have been found to attenuate less in nature than under 

 ideal laboratory conditions, apparently due to environmental 

 resonance.) During this last phase of the project, Morton will seek to 

 determine the amplitude of natural sounds at their sources. 



When the results of all this work are available, it should be possible 

 to distinguish between many of the aspects of bird sounds which are 

 purely or primarily adaptations to the "conducting" properties of the 

 environment (devices to ensure that the signal reaches potential re- 

 ceivers) and those designed to produce correct responses by receivers 

 (that encode all or most of the relevant information in the signal). 



John Oppenheimer recently began a study of the white-faced monkey 

 Cebus capucinus on Barro Colorado. Monkeys of the genus Cebus are 

 particularly interesting because they are convergent toward the best 

 known monkeys of the Old World (genus Macaco) in many aspects of 

 behavior, structure, and ecology; they are highly gregarious; some of 

 their social reactions appear to be unusually complex under the 

 conditions of captivity (although not necessarily in the wild); and 

 because they have been found to be remarkably "intelligent" in solving 

 certain types of problems and in tool-using. Oppenheimer is paying 

 special attention to such subjects as the structure of groups, intra- 

 and inter-specific reactions, diet, and predator evasion tactics. 



Begun late last year was a study by Martin G. Naumann of the 

 bionomics of three closely related species of wasps of the genus Pro- 

 topolybia. Although social wasps are a conspicuous and particularly 

 impressive part of the fauna of the Neotropical region, relatively little 

 is known about them. Many earlier observations of them were brief 

 and casual, and our knowledge of their seasonal activities and nesting" 

 cycles is most incomplete. 



Naumann seeks to measure seasonal fluctuations in nesting activity 

 and population size, with special attention to the effects of brood pro- 

 duction and caste composition upon the development of the social 

 organization of nests. Initial surveys were made on Barro Colorado 

 and neighboring areas of the mainland, and within one nest of Proto- 

 polybia pumila oviposition, larval development, and queen-worker inter- 

 actions were studied by the use of transparent insertions in the nest 

 covering. 



The number of visiting scientists and students using facilities of the 

 Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute increased last year to over 134. 




Top: Laboratory-library building at Barro Colorado Island with main 

 animal house, right, and animal cage, left. Center: A laboratory room. 

 Below: Part of the library. 





. 




Top: Grassy habitat on western bank of Canal Zone near Pedro Miguel locks. 

 Center: Second-growth forest near Gamboa. Below: Hillside NNE. of 

 laboratory clearing. Flowering and fruiting times of all trees on this slope 

 are beinar recorded. 




TROPICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE 169 



Mention of a few of their projects illustrates the range of activities 

 which the Institute has been able to facilitate, encourage, or support. 



Theodore Bullock and Alan Grinnell, of the University of California 

 at Los Angeles, during an entire summer on Barro Colorado, set up a 

 temporary but rather sophisticated neurophysiological laboratory to 

 study the peculiar electric signals emitted by knife-fishes of the family 

 Gymnotidae, which live in rather murky habitats where visibility 

 tends to be poor. The experiments indicate that at least some of the 

 electric signals are used in social communication. 



Eric Davidson of Rockefeller University collected anurans for use 

 in his studies of gene activity in oogenesis. Examination of such species 

 as Bufo typhonius, Phyllomedusa calladryas, Engystomops pustulosus, and 

 Leptodactylus pentadactylas, found to provide particularly useful and 

 convenient material, is yielding new information about relative rates 

 of RNA synthesis in oocyte nucleoli and lampbrush chromosomes, and 

 has suggested new experiments on possible DNA synthesis in the nu- 

 cleoli (which would be partial genomic replication, and a rather novel 

 phenomenon). 



T. C. Schneirla of the American Museum of Natural History and 

 Ralph Buchsbaum of the University of Pittsburgh were involved in a 

 dual field project. Schneirla continued his studies (begun in the 1930 7 s) 

 of army ants on Barro Colorado Island. With Buchsbaum and their 

 associates, he also made a film for the educational division of the 

 Encyclopaedia Britannica. 



Other scientists also returned to continue or resume long-term 

 investigations begun in earlier years. Charles F. Bennett, Jr., and 

 E. O. Willis, of the American Museum of Natural History, may be 

 cited as examples. Bennett collected various kinds of microclima to- 

 logical data on Barro Colorado Island. This work is part of a major 

 study of the evolution of neotropical forests (including the effects of 

 different human societies upon both the forests and the animals 

 inhabiting them) which is providing new information and insights for 

 both biologists and workers in other disciplines. Willis continued his 

 observations of forest birds, especially the species which follow army 

 ants. The complex of relations among these species, between the birds 

 and the ants, and between both birds and ants and other species more 

 or less frequently associated with ant columns, provides unusually 

 favorable opportunities for quantitative as well as qualitative analyses 

 of ecology and behavior. 



The broad subject which attracted the largest single group of visitors 

 with similar interests was, not unexpectedly, species diversity. Among 

 the scientists concentrating on this problem were Robert H. MacArthur 

 of Princeton, Peter Klopfer of Duke, Martin Cody of the University of 




170 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Pennsylvania, and Joseph Connell of the University of California at 

 Berkeley. MacArthur and Cody censused bird populations in a 

 variety of habitats in order to test the predictive validity of hypotheses 

 derived from earlier studies in the middle latitudes. Klopfer studied 

 several aspects of bird behavior in the hope of detecting widespread, 

 general differences between tropical and temperate species which might 

 help to explain variations in diversity. Connell studied diversity 

 among forest trees and the invertebrates of the coral reef near the 

 Galeta Island marine laboratory. 



A comprehensive over-all plan for the future research activities of the 

 Tropical Research Institute, now being discussed with scientists both 

 inside and outside the Smithsonian, envisages a gradual expansion of 

 research, largely along lines already established, but with some changes 

 of emphasis. The problem of the relationship between species diversity 

 and evolutionary success is to be attacked by means of a relatively 

 large number of coordinated research projects. Special efforts to 

 encourage investigations of groups of organisms previously ignored will 

 result next year in studies of land crabs and cephalopods. And the 

 program of collecting basic information on the physical environment 

 is to be expanded by monitoring a greater variety of parameters. 



Staff Publications 



Publications by the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute staff 

 are only a small part of the literature based wholly or partly upon the 

 results of research at the Institute facilities. Smithsonian Information 

 Leaflet 281 (rev. August 1965), "Bibliography of Papers pertaining to 

 the Natural History of Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone," lists 

 most of the earlier publications based on such work, and a bibliography 

 of the more recent work is in preparation. Both are available on 

 request. 

 Moynihan, M. Display patterns of tropical American "nine- 



primaried" songbirds. IV. The yellow-rumped tanager. Smith- 

 sonian Misc. Coll., vol. 149, no. 5, 34 pp., 1966. 

 Rubinoff, I. Mixing oceans and species. Natural History vol. 74, 



pp. 69-72, 1965. 

 . Gymnothorax galetae, a new moray eel from the Atlantic coast 



of Panama. Breviora no. 242, pp. 1-4, 1966. 

 . Distributional and ecological relationships of Panamanian 



shore fishes. Yearbook Amer. Phil. Soc. (1965), pp. 346-349, 



1966. 

 and Mead, G. W. Avocettinops yanot, a new nemichthid eel 



from the southern Indian Ocean. Breviora, no. 243, pp. 1-7. 



1966. 




TROPICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE 171 



Smith, N. G. Adaptations to cliff -nesting in some arctic gulls. Ibis, 



vol. 108, pp. 68-83, 1966. 

 . Evolution of some arctic gulls (Larus) : an experimental study 



of isolating mechanisms. Amer. Ornith. Union, Monogr. Ser. 



no. 4, pp. 1-99, 1966. 



Staff Changes 



Dr. Ira Rubinoff joined the Tropical Research Institute staff in July 

 1965. He is continuing his long-term research on Panamanian inshore 

 marine fishes (see below), and has taken charge of the marine lab- 

 oratories. 



A number of scientists interested in various aspects of the tropics 

 have been made honorary research associates of the Tropical Research 

 Institute, with the expectation that they will act as a panel to provide 

 expert advice and assistance in developing new research projects and 

 programs. The group includes Professor Ernst Mayr, Director of the 

 Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University; Dr. Martin 

 Young, Director of the Gorgas Memorial Laboratory; Dr. Robert H. 

 Mac Arthur, of the Department of Biology, Princeton University; Dr. 

 Giles W. Mead, Curator of Fishes, Museum of Comparative Zoology, 

 Harvard University; Dr. Charles F. Bennett, Jr. of the Department of 

 Geography, University of California at Los Angeles; Dr. W. John 

 Smith of the Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania; and 

 Mr. C. C. Soper, former Director of the Eastman Kodak Tropical 

 Laboratory. It is planned to enlarge this group to include distinguished 

 Latin American scientists. 



Education and Training 



The cooperative fellowship program established by the Smithsonian 

 Tropical Research Institute and the Scientific and Educational Divi- 

 sion of the Organization of American States became operational last 

 year. The first Fellows appointed were Mr. Maximo Galvez of Peru 

 and Mr. Estanislau da Silveira of Brazil. Stationed on Barro Colorado 

 Island, they are learning modern techniques, of field biology under 

 the guidance of the resident members of the Institute staff. 



Arrangements were made with the Organization for Tropical Studies* 

 to provide working space, some services, and other forms of assistance 



*A consortium of the University of Costa Rica and the following North American 

 Universities: California, Florida, Georgia, Harvard, Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana 

 State, Miami, Michigan, Southern California, Texas A & M, and Washington. 




172 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



(including some teaching) for an introductory course in tropical biology. 

 Increasingly close cooperation with the University of Panama is being 

 planned. Dr. Rubinoff has been appointed consultant in marine 

 biology in the University of Panama - cooperative Central American 

 training program. 



The senior members of the Institute's scientific staff are assisting, 

 and to some extent directing the work of, the graduate student interns. 

 They also provide occasional, informal guidance to visiting students 

 from other institutions. 



Conservation 



Effort to prevent poaching and disturbance of the forest on Barro 

 Colorado Island should be further helped next year when the staff of 

 wardens will be augmented. 



The few species of animals which disappeared from Barro Colorado 

 before it was set aside as a reserve are being re-introduced whenever 

 possible. A program for the protection of the coral reef and other 

 marine organisms near Galeta Island has been instituted with the 

 cooperation of the U.S. Navy. 



Members of the bureau staff also are providing advice and technical 

 assistance, when requested, to Latin American governments and 

 public authorities developing plans for biological reserves and national 

 parks. 



Acknowledgments 



The Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute can operate only with 

 the excellent cooperation of the Canal Zone Government and the 

 Panama Canal Company, the U.S. Army and Navy, and the govern- 

 ment authorities of the Republic of Panama. Thanks are due especially 

 to Executive Secretary of the Canal Zone Paul M. Runnestrand and 

 his staff; the customs and immigration officials of the Canal Zone; 

 the dredging division and police division of the Panama Canal Com- 

 pany; Major General James D. Alger, Commander, U.S. Army Forces 

 Southern Command; the late Rear Admiral Louis A. Bryan, Com- 

 mander, U.S. Naval Forces Southern Command; Lt. Col. William 

 Barron, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-4; Lt. Commander K. L. Robinson, 

 Commanding Officer Naval Security Group; Mr. Thomas P. McGann, 

 supervisor engineering technician, Navy Public Works Department: 

 Mr. Martin J. Hayes, Army Assistant Post Engineer; the U.S. Army 

 Maintenance Division; and the Eastman Kodak Company. 




Radiation Biology Laboratory 



W. H. Klein, Director 



All biological systems, from the unicellular through the spectrum 

 of multicellular organisms to entire ecosystems, or for that matter 

 the biosphere itself, can be thought of as open-ended thermodynamic 

 systems through which energy flows. The primary source of all energy 

 for these diverse biological systems is, of course, solar radiation. 



During the past year the Radiation Biology Laboratory has con- 

 tinued to direct its research efforts toward understanding the 

 mechanisms by which radiant energy is absorbed, converted to potential 

 chemical energy, and then utilized by cells for growth and differentia- 

 tion. Within this general framework the current research of the labo- 

 ratory is in four general areas: 



1. Regulatory biology — physiology of photomorphogenic re- 



sponses, 



2. Regulatory biology — biochemical mechanisms, 



3. Measurement of solar radiation, and 



4. Carbon dating — measurements and research techniques. 



Physiology of Photomorphogenic Responses 



In the general area of photomorphogenesis, chloroplast differentiation 

 is being studied with particular reference to protein synthesis. Chloro- 

 plasts of etiolated leaves increase in protein content when the leaves 

 are placed in the light. There is good reason to believe that this in- 



173 



230-457—66^—15 




174 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



crease in chloroplast protein is catalyzed by the chloroplast itself. 

 A routine preparative procedure for chloroplasts has been developed 

 for isolating bean-leaf plastids which are undergoing light-dependent 

 development and thus are carrying out synthesis of protein. The 

 plastid-containing homogenate is essentially cell-free and incorporates 

 radioactive amino acids into cold trichloroacetic acid-insoluble material. 

 This incorporation, which may partly represent incorporation into 

 protein, undoubtedly is partially due to formation of amino-acyl RNA. 

 However, the 1000 x g pellet fraction accounts for only a lesser part of 

 the incorporating activity of the homogenate fractions, although it has 

 the highest specific activity. The incorporation by this fraction is 

 highly dependent on the presence of an ATP generating system. 



Radioactive amino acid (leucine) is incorporated into the 1000 x g 

 pellet fraction even when TCA-precipitable material is extracted with 

 hot TCA. Some of the radioactivity precipitated by cold TCA is 

 removed by this treatment, indicating formation of both protein and 

 amino-acyl RNA. The incorporation of radioactivity into precipitates 

 extracted with hot TCA usually stops after 30 to 60 minutes. Incorpo- 

 ration is not carried out in heated chloroplasts. Rates of 5 to 50 

 m/x mole leucine/mg protein/hour have been obtained, calculated from 

 the specific activity of the leucine supplied. 



The 1000 x g fraction contains numerous chloroplasts. In addition, 

 starch grains and particles about 1^ in length, the latter probably 

 mitochondria, are also present, both being more numerous than 

 chloroplasts. Wall fragments and whole cells are present as minor 

 contaminants; nuclei have not been seen. 



Bacteria account for only a small portion of the observed incorpora- 

 tion activity. Experiments with Triton x 100 indicate that most of the 

 activity is in the supernatant after centrifugation at 6000 x g. If the 

 label had been incorporated into bacterial protein, it would have been 

 recovered in the pellet. 



Similarly, in experiments in which the reaction mixture is centrifuged 

 in a density gradient, little incorporated activity is found in the region 

 where nuclei would be expected. Ribosomes are probably not respon- 

 sible for the observed incorporation, since the specific activity of the 

 chloroplast-containing fraction with regard to incorporating activity is 

 higher than that of the ribosome fraction, and incorporation by the 

 chloroplast-containing fraction is insensitive to RNAase. The distri- 

 bution of incorporated radioactivity follows the distribution of chloro- 

 phyll. Further, when chloroplasts are fixed after incorporation and 

 are autoradiographed, the chloroplasts produce a higher grain count 

 than chloroplasts fixed before incorporation. Tims, the preliminar) 




RADIATION BIOLOGY LABORATORY 175 



conclusion is reached that the incorporation into protein of radioactive 

 leucine by the chloroplast-containing fraction is associated with the 

 chloroplasts. The extent of chloroplast involvement in the incorpora- 

 tion of amino acid is being determined. 



Biochemical Mechanisms 



Work has continued on the detection of early biochemical changes 

 that may be correlated with photomorphogenic stimulation. One of 

 the observations made during the survey of tracer distribution in 

 various metabolite fractions obtained from light-treated corn-leaf 

 tissue, was an indication of a light-stimulated utilization of phosphate. 

 Experiments were performed in which corn leaf sections were first 

 irradiated, then immediately transferred to a solution of glucose and 

 phosphate (P 32 ) substrate, and the specific activity of organic phos- 

 phates in extracts were determined at various times. A consistently 

 higher specific activity was found at all points on the time course in 

 light-treated samples. However, technical difficulties have prevented 

 a conclusive demonstration of an early phytochrome-associated increase 

 in phosphate turnover rates. Experiments are continuing to elucidate 

 the nature of this response. 



Phytochrome, a protein common to many plants, is known to be the 

 pigment involved in photomorphogenesis. Although phytochrome has 

 been partially purified from Avena by other laboratories, it was not 

 completely purified from any source, and consequently, very little was 

 known about the physical and chemical characteristics of the molecule. 

 A successful method for the isolation of pure phytochrome has been 

 developed in our laboratory and, in collaboration with Edward 

 Steers, Jr., and J. R. Suriano of the National Institutes of Health, data 

 have been obtained on pure phytochrome. 



The pigment is extracted from 4-day-old, etiolated annual rye shoots, 

 and purified 200-fold by ammonium sulfate fractionation and chro- 

 matography on calcium phosphate and DEAE-cellulose. The final 

 product sedimented in a Spinco Model E ultracentrifuge as a single 

 boundary with an S 20 w of approximately 9.5. Treatment with 

 sodium dodecylsulfate resulted in the formation of monomers with a 

 tentative S value of 1.8 and a molecular weight of approximately 

 36,000. No free sulfhydryl or disulfide groups were found by amino- 

 acid analyses, indicating that the monomers comprising the native 

 aggregate are held together through noncovalent bonds. There are 

 about 100 trypsin-sensitive bonds (lysine-farginine) per 100,000 

 molecular weight units, or about 36 per subunit. Phytochrome also has 




176 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



an excess of dicarboxylic amino acids over basic amino acids. It is 

 not known how many of these carboxyl groups are amidated, but it is 

 likely that phytochrome has a net negative charge at pH 7. 



Phytochrome is completely excluded by Sephadex G— 100 (exclusion 

 limit: 100,000) and it is not excluded by G-200 (exclusion limit: 

 200,000). Sephadex G— 150 almost completely excludes phytochrome. 

 This would indicate that phytochrome has a molecular weight near 

 150,000 if it does not interact with the dextran and if it is a perfect 

 hydrodynamic sphere. 



The purified phytochrome, after saturation irradiation at 730 rmx, 

 had an E|* of 6.9 at 277 m M , 0.87 at 376 m/z, and 2.2 at 662 m M . 

 This form, excited at 290 m/x, fluoresced at 340 m/z and at 672 m/z. 

 Excitation at 370 m/z produced fluorescence at 672 m/z. After saturation 

 irradiation at 660 m/z, phytochrome had an E le L of 6.9 at 277 m/z, 

 0.72 at 386 m/z, and 1.15 at 730 m/z. 



A study of growth and phototropism of moss protonema has been 

 initiated in our laboratory. The interest in a protonemal system lies 

 in the fact that the stimulus and response take place in a single uni- 

 nucleate cell. Potentially, it may be a simpler system than the multi- 

 cellular or coenocytic cells commonly used in studying photogrowth 

 responses. 



Preliminary experiments have been initiated to determine action 

 spectra for photogrowth and phototropism. Protonemata of the 

 clone of Physcomitrium pyriforme do not grow in darkness when supplied 

 adequate carbohydrate substrates. All visually detectable growth 

 ceases within a few minutes after removal from the light and resumes 

 within a few minutes after reexposure. Growth of the protonema is 

 apical, and switching from diffuse equilateral to unilateral light resulted 

 in a sharp elbow-like bend as the filament continued its growth toward 

 the light source. This behavior implies that phototropism of the 

 protonema involves a shifting of the whole apical growing zone to a 

 new lateral region rather than causing a differential growth between 

 the two sides, as is commonly observed in fungi. 



Both growth and tropism in this moss are supported by red light in 

 a broad spectral region from 610 to 730 m/z. Detailed action spectra 

 for both responses are being determined. Physcomitrium differs in its 

 phototropic response in that there appears to be little or no activity 

 in the blue region of the spectrum. The action spectra for growth 

 and tropism are similar. 



Spectrophotometric measurements of the light-sensitive sporangio- 

 phores of Phycomyces have continued and the absorption maxima for 

 light and dark adapted sporangiophores have been found to be sur- 

 prisingly constant (near 0.14 O.D. at 475 m/z) during and following 




Radiation Biology Laboratory: David L. Correll collecting fractions of 

 nucleic acids from marine viruses. Below: Franco Parenti, Visiting Re- 

 search Associate from the University of Milan, performing a spectrophoto- 

 metric analysis of protein from bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) chloroplasts by the 

 Folin-Ciocalteau method. 




Radiation Biology Laboratory: Austin Long with electronic counter, carbon- 

 dating laboratory. Below: Bernard J. Nebel determining orientation of 

 growth of Physcomitnum sp. as influenced by exposure to two unilateral light 

 sources. 




RADIATION BIOLOGY LABORATORY 177 



various light stimuli. To date, no absorption shifts (±0.001 O.D.) 

 following saturating pulse or step-up light stimuli have been observed, 

 even though these same stimuli produced well-defined growth responses 

 in the sporangiophores being measured. 



The temperature characteristics for the phototropic response to 

 continuous unilateral stimuli and growth responses to pulse stimuli 

 have been determined. The temperature optimum for both responses 

 occurs at 20±1°C while the maximum growth rate occurs between 

 15 and 20°C. Well-defined growth responses occur over the tempera- 

 ture range of 5° to 25°C with no marked temperature dependence. 

 However, the responses as well as growth disappear rapidly at tempera- 

 tures of 30°C or higher. 



Ribonucleic acids isolated from a variety of organisms have been 

 shown to contain 2 / -0-methylribonucleotides. The functional role of 

 such 0-methyl derivatives is not known. An attempt has been made 

 to study the biosynthesis of the 2'-0-methyl group of the RNA con- 

 tained in a ribonucleoprotein particle produced by Saprospira grandis. 

 This organism is a saprophytic marine flexi-bacterium which produces 

 large amounts of a rod-shaped, virus-like particle currently called the 

 rhapidosome. The RNA of rhapidosomes is at least 85% 2'-0-methyl- 

 ated. This fact, coupled with the large amount of rhapidosomes 

 produced and their ease of isolation, makes it an ideal system for the 

 study of 2'-0-methyl-RNA. 



Utilizing radioactive substrate precursors, which the saprophyte 

 Saprospira would be expected to incorporate, cells grown on 14 C-methyl- 

 methionine for many generations released rhapidosome particles which 

 were highly radioactive. However, the radioactivity was almost 

 entirely in the protein portion. Similarly, using 14 C-methyl-betaine 

 and 14 C-methyl-choline, no incorporation into 2 / -0-methyl group was 

 found. 



In vivo incorporation of 14 C0 2 , 14 C-Formate and 14 C-formaldehyde 

 was tested. These compounds are potential precursors of one carbon- 

 N 5 -derivatives of tetrahydrofolic acid at various oxidation states. No 

 incorporation into the 2 / -0-methyl group was found with formate or 

 formaldehyde, but tentative evidence of C0 2 incorporation was found. 

 Thus, it is indicated that C0 2 can penetrate the cell and is utilized, 

 perhaps via formate or formaldehyde which are normally excluded by 

 the host cell, in the synthesis of rhapidosome RNA. 



Solar Radiation 



Measurements of total sun and sky radiation have continued, using 

 an automatic system sampling once every three minutes for 100 m/z 




178 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



band widths from 0.29 to 2.5 p. Values of each spectral band have 

 been obtained, accurate to ±5%. However, it has been consistently 

 observed that the calibration factors for the present Hoover detectors 

 deviate markedly for early morning and late afternoon readings. A 

 comparison Eppley radiometer was installed this year and comparison 

 runs were made at all times of day and under variable sky cover 

 conditions. Reduction of these data indicates that an independent 

 electrical check system must be installed in each of the detectors. 

 Therefore, pyranometers which can be directly calibrated against an 

 electrical signal are being installed for each band-pass filter system. It 

 is anticipated that the accuracy of the measuring systems can be in- 

 creased to ±1% by this modification. 



Normal incidence readings for clear-sky days were reduced to the 

 top of the atmosphere and a calculation of the solar constant made. 

 Within the band pass of the quartz hemisphere the number of langley/ 

 min was found to be 2.03 ±0.02. If the radius vector correction 

 (a normalized value for the distance from the sun to the earth) was 

 applied, the value becomes 2.07 ±0.02. 



On a daily total energy basis, the present automatic data reduction 

 system indicates that the red/far-red ratio remains fairly constant, even 

 with extremely hazy sky conditions. 



Carbon Dating 



The carbon-dating section of the laboratory has designed and placed 

 in service a new 14 C detector which will double the analytical proc- 

 essing capability of the laboratory. Also under construction is a new 

 methane preparation system that will operate at higher pressures and 

 allow faster and more efficient preparation of methane required for 

 counting purposes. During the past year more than 80 samples were 

 dated. 



Field studies carried on in Arizona, including investigations of the 

 Willcox playa in southeastern Arizona, show ancient Lake Cochise to 

 have had a much greater extent than previously recognized. The 

 carbon-dating section also participated in a tree-ring project with the 

 University of Arizona. Analyses of bristlecone pine specimens have 

 been made and the dendrochronology has been extended to earlier 

 than 4300 B.C. 



During the past year extensive renovations of the Radiation Biology 

 Laboratory facilities were made. Several new laboratory areas were 

 added, including new dark-room facilities, cold room, chemical 

 laboratories, and staff offices. The main laboratory offices were con- 

 solidated near the center of the lab, the older sections were repainted, 




RADIATION BIOLOGY LABORATORY 179 



and electrical services were modernized. The shops were moved to 

 larger, modernized rooms. At the same time new lighting systems for 

 precision control and higher intensity capacity were installed in two 

 of the greenhouse environmental-control rooms. With these new 

 systems it is anticipated that it will be possible to vary the light intensity 

 continuously in a fashion analogous to natural daylight fluctuations, 

 while maintaining the spectral quality of the radiation at any predeter- 

 mined value. It is expected that these control-room facilities will be 

 in operation by the middle of next year. 



Staff Publications 



Correll, David L. Ribonucleic acid-polyphosphate from algae. 

 III. Hydrolysis Studies. Plant and Cell Physiol., vol. 6, pp. 

 661-669, 1965. 



. Pelagic phosphorus metabolism in Antarctic waters. Limnol. 



Oceanog., vol. 10, pp. 364-370, 1965. 



— . Imidonitrogen in Chlorella "polyphosphate." Science, vol. 



151, pp. 819-821, 1966. 

 Damon, Paul E.; Long; Austin; and Grey, Donald C. Fluctuation 



of atmospheric C 14 during the last six millennia. Journ. Geophys. 



Res., vol. 71, pp. 1055-1063, 1966. 

 Long, Austin. Smithsonian Institution radiocarbon measurements 



II. Radiocarbon, vol. 7, pp. 245-256, 1965. 

 and Mielke, James E. Smithsonian Institution radiocarbon 



measurements III. Radiocarbon, vol. 8, pp. 413-422, 1966. 



-. Techniques of methane production for radiocarbon dating. 



In Proceedings of the Sixth International Radiocarbon and 

 Tritium Dating Conference, pp. 666-777, 1966. 



Mitrakos, Konstantinos; Klein, W. H., and Price L. Soluble 

 sugar changes in etiolated corn leaf tissue as influenced by red- 

 light treatment. Planta, vol. 66, pp. 207-215, 1965. 



Price, Leonard; Mitrakos, K.; and Klein, W. H. Some kinetical 

 aspects of light-induced carbohydrate utilization in etiolated leaf 

 tissue. Physiol. Plant., vol. 18, pp. 540-549, 1965. 



Shropshire, W., Jr., and Gettens, Rebecca H. Light-induced 

 concentration changes of adenosine-triphosphate in Phycomyces 

 sporangiophores. Plant Physiol., vol. 41, pp. 203-207, 1966. 



Other Activities 



In August, at the American Institute of Biological Sciences meetings, 

 plant physiologist A. M. Steiner presented a paper, "The Influence of 




180 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Red Light on the Distribution of C-14 in Etiolated Corn Leaf Sec- 

 tions." Biochemist M. M. Margulies, at the symposium on "Croissance 

 et Viellissement des Chloroplasts" in Gorsem, St. Trond, Belgium, 

 presented a communication, "Effects of Chloramphenicol on Light- 

 dependent Formation of Structure and Proteins of Chloroplasts of 

 Phaseolus vulgaris." Assistant Director W. Shropshire in October 

 presented a lecture on "Sensory Systems of Phycomyces" to the Bio- 

 logical Division of Purdue University, and in December gave two 

 lectures and laboratory demonstrations on "Biophysical Methods 

 Applicable to Stimulus-Response Systems" at the University of 

 Maryland. 



In the proceedings of the annual meetings of the Federation of 

 American Society for Experimental Biology (25:3086, 1966) was pub- 

 lished an abstract: "Phytochrome: Isolation and Partial Characteriza- 

 tion," by David L. Correll, Edward Steers, Jr., J. L. Edwards, J. R. 

 Suriano, and W. Shropshire, Jr. 



In May 1966 biochemists F. Parenti and M. M. Margulies presented 

 a paper, "Amino Acid Incorporation by a Chloroplast Containing 

 Fraction from Developing Bean Leaves," to the Washington Section 

 of the American Society of Plant Physiologists at Goucher College, 

 Maryland. 



Staff Changes 



Scientists who joined the staff during the year are cytogeneticist 

 Te-Hsiu Ma and plant biochemist Robert L. Weintraub. Biochemist 

 Francesco Parenti, visiting from the University of Milano, Italy, 

 joined the laboratory in October 1965 to work on protein synthesis in 

 chloroplasts. A. M. Steiner returned to the Botanical Institute, Uni- 

 versity of Freiburg, Germany, in November; Konstantinos Mitrakos 

 returned to Greece as Director of the Botanical Institute of the Univer- 

 sity of Athens in January 1966; and cytogeneticist Robert W. Rogers 

 resigned in May 1966. 




Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 



Fred L. Whipple, Director 



TT'or the Astrophysical Observatory, 1966 was an anniversary 

 ■*■ year. Participating in the Bicentennial of James Smithson's birth, 

 the Observatory was represented by the Director, who was one of 

 the invited lecturers. His paper, "Knowledge and Understanding of 

 the Physical Universe as Determinants of Man's Progress," discussed 

 the philosophical and sociological factors in science today, presenting 

 evidence to support Smithson's thesis "it is in his knowledge that man 

 has found his greatness and his happiness." The Observatory also 

 commemorated anniversaries — its own 75th and its 10th in Cam- 

 bridge — by holding two international symposiums, the Symposium on 

 Meteor Orbits and Dust,* 1 and the Aeronomy Symposium on Upper 

 Atmosphere Density and Composition (under the auspices of the Inter- 

 national Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy). 2 



A milestone was passed by the Observatory with the announcement 

 of the Smithsonian Standard Earth. 3 This accurate measure of the 

 earth's size and gravitation is the first to incorporate transoceanic 

 distances determined with precision on the order of 10 meters. 



A major contribution in the field of positional astronomy is the 

 Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory Star Catalog. 3 Compiled and up- 

 dated from the best available sources, the data contained in the 

 Catalog give positions and motions for a quarter million stars. The 

 2600 pages of data were composed in 1 % seconds each by computer, 

 thereby avoiding errors and the monstrous task of hand typesetting 

 and proofreading. 



*Unless otherwise noted, research is supported from Federal funds appropriated 

 to the Smithsonian Institution. The Observatory, by paying scientists' salaries, 

 shares in the support of all research. Support from outside sources is detailed in 

 notes 1-35 on page 212. 



181 




182 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Meteors and Comets 



Astronomically, it was the year of the Great Comet, Ikeya-Seki. 

 A spectacular early morning object, the comet rivaled Halley's and 

 was the fourth longest comet ever recorded. Discovered on Septem- 

 ber 18, 1965, by two Japanese observers, K. Ikeya and T. Seki, the 

 new object, of 8th magnitude, was moving slowly through the con- 

 stellation Hydra. 



Its discovery was immediately confirmed on Baker-Nunn photographs 

 made by the Smithsonian network of Astrophysical Observing Stations, 

 and announced to the world by the Central Bureau for Astronomical 

 Telegrams at SAO. 4 A preliminary orbit computed from a series 

 of early observations enabled the Director to identify the new comet 

 as a member of the "sun-grazing" family that has been producing spec- 

 tacular comets from time to time since the 1 7th century. Owen J. Gin- 

 gerich, director of the Central Bureau, and Brian G. Marsden quickly 

 adapted an existing program to compute orbits and ephemerides. 



With daily predictions computed in Cambridge, the Baker-Nunn 

 cameras continued to photograph the comet as it came closer to the 

 sun. Brightening steadily, it was visible to the unaided eye during 

 the afternoon of October 20 and again the following day. About a 

 week later, the comet had developed a tail some 30° long and was a 

 brilliant sight in the morning sky. 



Soon after it passed the sun, Comet Ikeya-Seki was observed to have 

 broken into several pieces. Shortly before, the Director and Robert P. 

 Stefanik had published a new concept of the icy-conglomerate comet 

 nucleus to explain this splitting of some comets near perihelion. 

 They suggested that early, short-lived radioactivity within such comets 

 causes the most volatile materials, such as methane, to move from 

 the central area to an outer shell, where they refreeze. This would 

 make new comets rather brittle shells, subject to heat shock and 

 possible breakage when they first enter the inner parts of the solar 

 system and are heated by solar radiation. 



By the end of January, when Comet Ikeya-Seki had grown too faint 

 to photograph, the Observatory had secured 998 observations. They 

 are now being reduced and analyzed. Richard B. Southworth is 

 measuring photographs of Comet Ikeya-Seki and others in two spectral 

 regions. 3,5 



Observations of Ikeya-Seki were part of a broader program of 

 participation in the International Year of the Quiet Sun. For that 

 program, the Observatory is conducting a study of comet brightnesses 

 in search of information on the relation between solar radiation and 

 cometary phenomena. Although direct correlations of cometary 




METEORS AND COMETS 183 



brightnesses with solar activity are not generally established, the Di- 

 rector and Diarmaid H. Douglas-Hamilton have found that observed 

 appearances of the nucleus or tail of Comet Encke correlate positively 

 with the level of solar activity. This suggests a triggering effect. 

 They have also been investigating the slow decay of periodic comet 

 brightnesses, particularly that of Comet Encke over the last 180 years. 

 This comet appears to be dying slowly and may conceivably disappear 

 by the end of the century. 



The Director assisted in the organization and was chairman of the 

 Symposium on Nature and Origin of Comets held in Liege, Belgium, in 



July. 



At the Symposium on Meteor Orbits and Dust, 1 the meteorite 

 content of the space surrounding the earth was discussed in detail. 

 The conference was sponsored jointly by SAO and NASA; Gerald S. 

 Hawkins served as chairman. The Observatory presented findings 

 from its meteor research program. 6 Based on both radar and optical 

 observations, the program is coordinated by Hawkins, with Southworth 

 and Richard E. McCrosky as chief investigators. With I. I. Shapiro 

 of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Giuseppe Colombo and Don 

 A. Lautman presented a study of the forces affecting the motion of 

 small dust particles in interplanetary space. They analyzed factors 

 that might concentrate dust around the earth, such as gravitational 

 focusing, ejection of dust from the moon by meteor impact, and capture 

 of dust particles in the earth's gravitational field. They found no 

 mechanism that should produce a large concentration of dust near the 

 earth. 



The Meteor Radar at Havana, Illinois, was completely refur- 

 bished during the year. 7 A new, phase -coherent, 8-station radar 

 network has been assembled. More than 200 hours of observations 

 have been made with the new system, and some of the data have 

 already been reduced. 8 Franco F. Verniani completed a theoretical 

 study of the feasibility of measuring atmospheric density and tempera- 

 ture at heights between 80 and 100 km through the amplitude decay 

 of radar echoes from meteors. Mario D. Grossi, who was responsible 

 for the coherent system, is using it for measuring winds continuously 

 in the upper atmosphere between 80- and 100-km altitude. 9 



At Wallops Island, two artificial meteors carried aloft by rockets 

 were fired into the atmosphere and, for the first time, one was success- 

 fully observed by both optical and radar systems. Data from this test 

 are being analyzed by McCrosky and Southworth. 



Under the supervision of McCrosky, the Prairie Network has con- 

 tinued to operate with increased efficiency during the past year. 10 Over 

 300 meteors were photographed simultaneously by two or more of the 




184 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



16 camera stations, a requisite for the determination of the atmospheric 

 trajectory and mass of a meteoroid. Approximately a third of the 

 meteors were of sufficient duration to allow computation of an accurate 

 heliocentric orbit for the body. 



Meteoroids are known to originate from both comets and asteroids. 

 A primary purpose of the Network is the observation of extremely 

 bright objects that were thought to originate primarily from the 

 asteroidal source. These meteroids, consisting of material of relatively 

 well-known composition and structure, could supply the needed cali- 

 bration to improve our understanding of the corresponding character- 

 istics of the cometary matter entering the atmosphere as meteors. 



Orbital information obtained from Prairie Network meteors suggests 

 that perhaps a quarter of the brightest objects are of asteroidal origin. 

 However, analysis of the trajectory of these bodies suggests with equal 

 force that their structure, in many cases, is remarkably like that of the 

 fragile, low-density material generally associated with cometary objects. 

 The solution of this apparent dilemma is an immediate goal of 

 the project. 



Meteorites and Cosmic Dust 



The physical, chemical, and mineralogical characteristics of mete- 

 orites are under intensive investigation at the Observatory. Being of 

 extraterrestrial origin, meteorites yield valuable data on historical 

 conditions and processes elsewhere in the solar system. 



Introducing a new idea to this field, the Director suggested that 

 chondrites, the tiny, sometimes glassy spheroids in stony meteorites, 

 may have been created by lightning in the primitive solar nebula 

 either before or as the asteroidal bodies that produce meteorites were 

 formed. To test this suggestion Winfield VV. Salisbury is assembling 

 a laboratory system for approximating primordial conditions of pres- 

 sure, temperature, and electrical discharge in small quantities of 

 meteoritic dust. 11 John A. Wood is collaborating in manufacturing 

 artificial "primitive" dust. In regions where dust-particle density is 

 sufficient to produce frequent collisions, enough electrostatic charge 

 separation may take place to produce a nearly continuous lightning 

 discharge. (This effect is observed in terrestrial dust storms and 

 volcanic dust clouds.) These discharges may agglomerate dust particles 

 into particles of meteoric size, and account for the temperature and 

 flocculation necessary to produce the chondrules observed. 



In collaboration with Edward L. Fireman, the Director continued 

 research on the problem of immediate supply and destruction factors 

 for meteorites. It appears that some are chipped off the Apollo-type 

 asteroids whose orbits cross that of the earth, and that their etching 




METEORITES AND COSMIC DUST 185 



rates are appreciable; both effects are caused by collisions with inter- 

 planetary materials. The Apollo asteroids are constantly being 

 eliminated by gravitational and collisional interaction with the earth, 

 and are probably supplied from Mars-crossing orbits, as Opik suggested. 



In an attempt to determine relative erosion rates of different meteorite 

 types, Matthias F. Comerford exposed a number of terrestrial and 

 meteorite specimens to a simulated space environment in the shock 

 tube at NASA's Lewis Research Center. Results show that dense, 

 brittle materials suffer a linear weight loss of about 1 mg per joule of 

 impact energy, while the losses of tougher, metallic materials are 

 barely measurable. The greater weight loss suffered by brittle materials 

 was predicted, but the difference in rate may be more than expected. 



Absence of some constituents such as aluminum-26 from the particles 

 recovered from the Greenland icecap led Fireman, Robert H. 

 McCorkell, 12 and James C. DeFelice to suspect that some of the 

 original meteoritic material trapped in glacial ice might go into solu- 

 tion when the ice is melted to collect the residual dust. To recover 

 this dissolved material, Fireman and McCorkell have been using an 

 ion-exchange column; other material in colloidal suspension was 

 recovered by natural sponges coated with iron hydroxide. In all, some 

 million gallons of water were pumped through the system. 



Fireman and James C. D'Amico continued to measure isotope 

 ratios in various meteorites, dust, a ad sea sediments. From such 

 ratios in the 70-ton Hoba West meteorite, McCorkell has established 

 that the meteorite fell between 80,000 and 200,000 years ago. 



In a search for specific differences between spherules of terrestrial 

 origin and cosmic particles, Frances W. Wright and Fred A. Franklin 

 are determining densities of individual spherules of possible extra- 

 terrestrial origin, using samples between 8 and 50 microns in radius. 

 They have also measured densities of individual volcanic spherules 

 and test samples of known composition. The results indicate that 

 samples collected in Greenland and at the South Pole have densities 

 at least 25% greater than those of similar specimens of volcanic origin. 



Frances W. Wright and Paul W. Hodge continued chemical analyses, 

 with the electron-probe microanalyzer, of microscopic , spherules of 

 possible extraterrestrial origin. As a check on these studies, they 

 analyzed 12 spherules from recent volcanic eruptions. They also 

 studied abundance anomalies of artificial meteoritic spherules pro- 

 duced by melting both iron and stony-iron meteorites. The iron/ 

 nickel ratio is highly variable for iron meteorite particles, and spherules 

 from stony-iron meteorites vary greatly in composition. 



David Tilles calculated the expected abundance of solar-flare rare- 

 gas ions implanted in fine-grained dust in space. He found that the 




186 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



calculated argon abundance agrees, within an order of magnitude, 

 with the minimum amounts of excess argon-36 and argon-38 released 

 at high temperatures from fine-grained concentrates from the Pacific 

 Ocean and Greenland. Presumably, these ocean sediments are rich 

 in extraterrestrial dust. He also investigated the planetary atmospheric 

 source mechanism of solar-wind embedment in cometary interplanetary 

 dust. 



Ursula B. Marvin is studying spherules of probable cosmic origin 

 that are found in beach sands. These are black magnetic spherules 

 of the type found in polar ice, Pacific clays, and other environments 

 relatively free of industrial contamination. The spherules consist 

 of magnetite, wiistite, and hematite, and range in size from 40 to 600 

 microns. Mrs. Marvin is mapping the distribution of these spherules 

 in both Pleistocene and Recent beaches. 



By studying the distribution of nickel in the metal alloys taenite 

 and kamacite found in meteorites, Wood has been able to determine 

 the rate at which the bodies initially cooled. He has applied this 

 technique to 10 octahedrites (iron meteorites) and a similar number 

 of chondrites (stony meteorites). Most of these meteorites cooled 

 from 600°C to 400°C at rates ranging from 1°C to 10°C per million 

 years. Such slow cooling through this range indicates that they were 

 buried under layers of insulating rocky material, tens of kilometers 

 thick, inside their parent planets. 



With the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, Comerford is 

 investigating the effects of high pressure on the annealing rates of 

 metallic meteorites. Many of the microstructural changes observed in 

 metallic systems do not necessarily involve changes in chemical com- 

 position; some involve only changes in lattice defects. 



In her study of the diamonds of the Canyon Diablo meteorite, with 

 Clifford Frondel of Harvard University, Mrs. Marvin observed two 

 types of diamond. 13 One, occurring in irregular masses of black fine- 

 grain diamond, has been interpreted as metastable products of impact 

 shock. The other type possesses the outward form of isometric single 

 crystals, but the internal structure of polycrystalline aggregates. 

 X-ray patterns of these diamonds display a pairing or tripling of the 

 strongest reflections, an effect suggestive of radiation damage. This 

 type may prove critical in the controversy over the origin of meteoritic 

 diamonds. 



Planetary Studies 



Culminating 10 years of active research, the Observatory presented 

 the Smithsonian Standard Earth 3 at the COSPAR Space Science 




PLANETARY STUDIES 187 



Symposium in Vienna, Austria, in May 1966. The delegation of SAO 

 scientists was headed by the Director. 



The refined station coordinates were obtained by a combination of 

 dynamical and geometrical methods. 14 Based on original work by 

 the late Imre Izsak, the dynamical method has been extensively re- 

 worked and improved by Edward M. Gaposchkin. George Veis is 

 chiefly responsible for the geometrical method. The complex combi- 

 nation of the two was performed in large part by Walter J. Kohnlein. 



For the 12 stations in the SAO network, the agreement between the 

 two independent methods supports the conclusion that the station co- 

 ordinates are indeed accurate to some 15 meters. Values for all the 

 tesseral harmonic coefficients with indexes through 8, have also been 

 obtained. Coefficients for still higher terms have been determined 

 for those that have an effect of more than 5 meters on the orbit of any 

 of the 13 satellites used. The Standard Earth also incorporates coeffi- 

 cients for the zonal harmonics derived by Yoshihide Kozai and reported 

 in Smithsonian Tear 1965. Charles A. Lundquist was responsible for 

 the coordination and comparison of the calculations leading to the 

 Standard Earth. 



Until now, the determination of the earth's gravitational field has 

 had insufficient resolution to be tested significantly against surface 

 gravity observations. However, William E. Strange has shown that the 

 resolution is now fine enough that reasonable correlations are beginning 

 to emerge. 15 



Chi- Yuen Wang has been concerned with interpretation of geo- 

 potential data derived from satellite observations in terms of the 

 interior structure of the earth. 3 The interpretation involves correlations 

 with other geophysical data such as velocity of seismological waves. 

 Consequently, he has been measuring the velocity of compressional 

 waves in some possible mantle rocks such as dunite, eclogite, and 

 peridotite. 



With the adoption of the Standard Earth, the reduction of satellite 

 data is now approaching an accuracy comparable to that of the 

 observations made by the Baker-Nunn cameras, so the Observatory is 

 exploring new techniques for satellite observation. The prime effort 

 is being devoted to refinement of a laser tracking system. 3 An engi- 

 neering model is now being tested under the direction of Carlton G. 

 Lehr, Leonard A. Maestre, and Peter H. Anderson at the New Mexico 

 Astrophysical Observing Station. Early evidence suggests that tracking 

 accuracy may be improved by an order of magnitude. Lundquist and 

 Henry D. Friedman have initiated a review of new scientific horizons 

 attainable from more accurate satellite tracking by lasers or other 

 means. 



230-457—66 16 




188 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Luigi G. Jacchia, in collaboration with Jack W. Slowey, Max 

 Roemer, and Franco F. Verniani, continued his investigations of 

 upper-atmosphere structure and variations through the analysis of the 

 drag on artificial satellites. 3 Recently these studies were significantly 

 advanced by two balloon satellites (Explorer 19 and Explorer 24) 

 specifically launched for Smithsonian's drag-analysis project. Obser- 

 vations of the two Explorer balloons have yielded particularly inter- 

 esting results. It appears that, at the perigee height of the two satellites 

 (500-700 km), the diurnal bulge is elongated in the north-south 

 direction and is centered on the equator rather than migrating with the 

 subsolar point as previously supposed. The resulting temperature 

 distribution in the exosphere is reminiscent of the electron-density 

 distribution in the F2 layer. Since the latter also exhibits a semiannual 

 variation in phase with that observed in the neutral-gas temperature, 

 one is led to suspect that ions, whose motion is partly governed by the 

 earth's magnetic field, play a much more important role in controlling 

 upper atmospheric temperatures than had hitherto been assumed. 



In cooperation with the Argentinian Space Research Council, 

 Mario D. Grossi has designed equipment for investigating the forma- 

 tion of field-aligned shells of thermal electrons in the magnetosphere. 

 A high-powered HF transmitter has been borrowed from the U.S. 

 Army and installed at the Astrophysical Observing Station in Jupiter, 

 Florida. Receiving equipment is being set up at Usuhaia, Tierra del 

 Fuego, roughly at the conjugate point of Jupiter. Radio waves trans- 

 mitted from Jupiter and guided in the magnetosphere along the 

 L=1.8 shell will be sought by a receiver at Usuhaia. Analysis of the 

 received signals will provide data on the electron content and gradients 

 in the magnetospheric shells, the time dependence of basic shell 

 characteristics, and correlations between the latter and phenomena 

 related to solar activity. 



Nathaniel P. Carleton, with Charles H. Dugan, has been investigating 

 excitation and de-excitation of metastable oxygen atoms (especially 

 the *D level) in an electric discharge, and the processes by which fast 

 photoelectrons convey their energy to the ionosphere. 16 He finds that 

 X D oxygen atoms react very rapidly with nitrogen molecules, so that 

 most of them will be destroyed before radiating, if they are created in 

 the atmosphere below about 150-km altitude. Anthony R. Lee has 

 been preparing a laboratory study of inelastic electron-ion collisions, 

 in which he will observe light radiated from the region of intersection 

 of crossed electron and ion beams. Costas Papaliolios is making a 

 careful measurement of the lifetime of the lowest excited state of the 

 CO molecule by observing the absorption spectrum of the molecule 

 at high resolution. In his photoelectron work, Carleton hopes to 




PLANETARY STUDIES 189 



explain the intensity and variability of the radiation from *D atoms in 

 the upper atmosphere observed at the Blue Hill Observatory. 



Jacchia's static diffusion models of the upper atmosphere with empiri- 

 cal temperature profiles and their associated variation models have 

 been adopted by the U.S. Committee on Extension of Standard 

 Atmosphere and will be incorporated in the forthcoming U.S. Supple- 

 mental Atmospheres. 



Basing his work on these atmospheric models, Ladislav Sehnal 12 has 

 developed a technique for computing short-periodic perturbations of 

 artificial-satellite orbits, caused by atmospheric drag. The disturbing 

 function is constructed by computer; the effects of the diurnal bulge are 

 included. 



In a theoretical study, Manfred P. Friedman has developed a set 

 of equations to describe the structure of the upper atmosphere between 

 120 and 1000 km, the altitude range containing nearly all artificial 

 satellites. 3 These equations have been solved on a digital computer and 

 predict concentrations of five major atmospheric constituents (0 2 , N 2 , 

 O, He, H) and the temperature distribution all around the earth. 



A particularly exciting advance in the study of the solar system is the 

 availability of closeup photographs of the surface of the moon obtained 

 by the Ranger series of NASA. Donald H. Menzel has reviewed the 

 various theories relating to the surface characteristics of the moon. 17 

 He suggested that radioactivity kept the moon liquid during the early 

 part of its life and that a porous crust with pockets of gas floated on the 

 surface. Meteoritic impacts and volcanism caused the old craters, and 

 successive lava flows created the maria and ghost craters. 



Using theoretical techniques, Professor Prabhu L. Bhatnagar of 

 Bangalore, India, has studied the surface structure of the moon. 



An invited paper, "The Meteoritic Environment of the Moon," 

 was presented by the Director at a lunar symposium sponsored by the 

 Royal Society of London and will appear in their publication. It 

 concerns meteoritic impact rates and crater formation on the moon and 

 shows that the larger craters fit expectations for large-body impact, 

 whereas the small impact craters are less numerous than expected. 



Looking to the future, Winfield W. Salisbury has proposed using 

 the subsurface materials in the lunar lithosphere as a propagation 

 medium for communications on the moon. Its small diameter and lack 

 of an ionosphere will make usual methods of radio communication 

 between stations on the moon's surface impossible or impractical. 

 The low thermal conductivity and water content of lunar-surface 

 materials suggest that they may be an appropriate transmission 

 medium. 




190 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Studying the rotational motions of the moon and planets, Giuseppe 

 Colombo has developed a simple model that provides further under- 

 standing of their mechanics. 3 With it he has shown that the moon's 

 rotational variations minimize the dissipation of energy by internal 

 friction in the earth-moon system. 



A particularly striking discovery has been made by Colombo. He 

 pointed out that Mercury's rotation period, as determined from 

 radar observations, is exactly two-thirds of its orbital period, indicating 

 a "locking-in" process. With Shapiro he made a detailed analysis of 

 the gravitational and tidal forces acting on the planet and found that 

 such a locking in of Mercury's rotation should be expected. 



Ralph F. Baierlein 12 has been calculating the general relativistic 

 corrections to the lunar motion. Extending Brumberg's results by 

 including the influence of the eccentricity of the earth's orbit, his 

 results may be used with laser ranging measurements of the earth-moon 

 distance to test the theory of general relativity. 



Allan F. Cook and Fred A. Franklin have accounted for the observed, 

 but perplexing, fact that the thickness of Saturn's rings is much greater 

 than the diameter of the particles of which they are composed. By 

 assuming that electrostatic forces are responsible for keeping the 

 particles in the rings well separated, they have shown that the particle 

 radii must be less than about one millimeter. This size is consistent 

 with all present observations and implies that the total extent of the 

 rings is about one meter. 



Jean Meffroy introduced Von Zeipel's method in general planetary 

 theory. He eliminated the short-periodic terms of a first-order theory, 

 and he is currently investigating the elimination of the long-periodic 

 terms. 3 



With E. Lippincott of the University of Maryland and R. E. Eck 

 and M. O. Dayhoff of the National Biomedical Research Foundation, 

 Carl Sagan has made an IBM-7094 analysis of the expected thermo- 

 dynamic-equilibrium composition of the atmospheres of Earth, Mars, 

 Venus, and Jupiter. 18 They find that except for trace compounds 

 produced by biological activity, lightning, radiation, and volcanism, 

 the terrestrial atmosphere is close to thermodynamic equilibrium. The 

 atmosphere of Venus is inconsistent with the possibility of hydrocarbons 

 either on the surface or in the clouds. For Mars, Venus, and Jupiter 

 there are no molecular species of large predicted equilibrium abundance 

 and spectroscopically accessible absorption features that have not 

 already been identified. However, at high temperatures, such as would 

 be produced by lightning discharges, simple hydrocarbons and cyanides, 

 polycyclic aromatics, and a variety of nitrogen compounds would be 

 expected on Jupiter. Some of these compounds arc brightly colored 




FLIGHT EXPERIMENTS 191 



and may contribute to the variable colorations observed on Jupiter. 



Sagan 19 and James B. Pollack have devised a comprehensive model 

 of the surface environment of Mars. They show that the reasons for 

 elevations being colder on Earth do not apply to Mars and that the 

 seasonal growth and recession of the Martian polar caps point to the 

 dark areas being highlands. 



In conjunction with R. M. Goldstein of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory 

 they have analyzed the radar Doppler spectra of Mars, obtained at 

 JPL's Goldstone tracking facility during the 1963 and 1965 oppositions. 

 They find, both from the total power as a function of longitude and 

 from the details of the Doppler spectra, that Martian dark areas are 

 indeed at higher elevations than the bright areas. Regions undergoing 

 marked secular changes have shallow slopes, suggesting that the secular 

 changes are due to drifting dust. Such elevation differences permit 

 the construction of an inorganic model of Martian seasonal phenomena, 

 in which smaller, more highly reflecting particles are blown off the 

 highlands during spring, and then redistributed back on the highlands 

 by the greater winds of late fall and winter. 



Sagan's laboratory for prebiological organic chemistry has been 

 concentrating on nucleotide-amino acid interactions in simulated 

 primitive terrestrial environments and near-ultraviolet production of 

 amino acids from the simulated primitive atmosphere, using cosmically 

 abundant untraviolet-photon acceptors. 18 



William M. Irvine continued his theoretical study of light scattering 

 and radiative transfer in planetary atmospheres. 20 The effect of multiple 

 scattering on absorption features was investigated with the aid of a 

 probability distribution of photon optical paths in the medium. The 

 usual theory of radiative transfer breaks down when the scattering 

 particles are large enough and their density is great enough so that 

 they shadow one another. This "shadowing effect" was studied in 

 detail and the appropriate correction to the equation of transfer 

 derived. 



Flight Experiments 



On May 29, a 250-foot polyethylene balloon carried SAO's gamma- 

 ray spark chamber, designed and built by Giovanni G. Fazio and 

 Henry F. Helmken, into the dawn sky. 21 From the National Balloon 

 Launch Facility in Palestine, Texas, the balloon took about 2 hours 

 to climb to its ceiling of 125,000 feet, where it floated for 7 hours. The 

 instrument telemetered television pictures of gamma-ray events in the 

 spark chamber while the balloon rose in the atmosphere. As it hung 

 at maximum altitude, the spark chamber scanned the Crab Nebula, 

 Sun, Milky Way, and several radio sources. Reduction of the data, 




192 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



now going on, will reveal whether the equipment detected gamma 

 radiation from any of these possible sources. 



Frances W. Wright and Paul W. Hodge are continuing their program 

 of collecting meteoritic dust particles of microscopic size. Two clam- 

 shell-type collectors have been built for balloon nights to 110,000 feet. 



Robert J. Davis has established an accurate standard of spectro- 

 photometric sensitivity between 1,000 and 3,000 angstroms. Referred 

 to a National Bureau of Standards total radiance standard by means 

 of a thermal detector, Davis' standard is for use in Project Celescope. 22 

 Designed for ultraviolet observations from an orbiting astronomical 

 observatory, the Celescope package is now undergoing final cali 

 brations and its sensitivity is being measured. Toward this end, 

 Davis has confirmed the index of refraction of lithium fluoride and is 

 working on the measurement of the index of refraction of magnesium 

 fluoride, these substances being used in the optical parts of the 

 instrument. 



Fazio, Joseph F. Dolan, and Matthias F. Comerford have completed 

 a laboratory investigation showing that the Borrmann effect (anomalous 

 transmission of polarized X-rays through single crystals) can be used 

 to measure X-ray polarization. Experimental results and calculations 

 indicate that satisfactory statistics can be obtained with exposure 

 times on the order of a day for very weak celestial sources of X-rays 

 and as little as a few seconds for a solar flare. 



Theoretical Astrophysics 



Progress in theoretical astrophysics proceeded along three major 

 fronts: stellar atmospheres, relativity and cosmology, and high-energy 

 physics. 



The stellar-atmospheres group under the general guidance of Charles 

 A. Whitney continued its investigations of the theory of model atmos- 

 pheres, the analysis of stellar spectra, and the theory of spectral-line 

 formation in astrophysical plasmas. 23 



Whitney pursued his study of the interplay between gas-dynamic 

 and radiative-energy exchange in a pulsating stellar atmosphere, and 

 developed a simple formalism for studying the theory of temperature 

 inversions in the superficial layers of stellar atmospheres. 24 



George B. Rybicki developed a theory of radiative transfer that is 

 applicable to the material in a turbulent state and applied this theory 

 to the observed fluctuations in the solar atmosphere. 



Several members of the group continued their collaborative study 

 of the effects of departures from local thermodynamic equilibrium 

 on the structure of stellar atmospheres. They find that the results 




THEORETICAL ASTROPHYSICS 193 



for hot main-sequence stars are quite sensitive to the values of the 

 collision cross sections for atomic hydrogen, and they conclude that 

 such departures may have a significant influence on atmospheric 

 structure. This work is now being extended to the solar atmosphere. 



Two studies of the influence of absorption lines on the structure of 

 stellar atmospheres, under the direction of Stephen E. Strom and 

 Owen J. Gingerich, have achieved significant progress in refining the 

 calculation of temperature distributions. Examination of the solar 

 spectrum has empirically verified these calculations. 



Gingerich, with David W. Latham and Jeffrey L. Linsky, is now 

 pioneering the computation of model atmospheres for very cool stars, 

 in the temperature range 1500°K to 4500°K. 25 The construction of 

 these models presents several interesting difficulties, and continued 

 sophistication of the analytical and numerical procedures is required 

 to cope with the enormous variations of opacity with wavelength and 

 with the preponderance of Rayleigh scattering. Willard R. Chappell 

 investigated the fundamental theory of the interaction of radiation 

 with plasmas, with the purpose of obtaining kinetic equations to 

 describe the approach of such systems to equilibrium. 



Several members of the group, principally Strom and Gingerich, 

 have continued their extensive empirical studies of stellar spectra with 

 the aim of determining atmospheric parameters and chemical abun- 

 dances. The precision and scope of this work make it unique. The 

 initial studies have concentrated on several normal main-sequence 

 stars, some stars whose very low metal abundance indicates their great 

 age, members of several galactic star clusters, and the eclipsing star 

 Beta Aurigae. The data for these studies have been obtained by visits 

 to several western observatories. 



Leo Goldberg has carried out a number of theoretical investigations 

 concerning astrophysical implications of auto-ionization, the intensities 

 of hydrogen recombination lines, and the interpretation of the solar 

 spectrum. 26 The theoretical intensity of the autoionizing calcium 

 triplet near 6350 A was calculated as a function of spectral class and 

 luminosity, and was found to agree with observation for stars hav- 

 ing the same calcium/hydrogen abundance. Theoretical intensities of 

 hydrogen recombination lines, emitted at radio frequencies by H II 

 regions, have been found to be sensitive to small departures from 

 equilibrium in the populations of highly excited levels. These de- 

 partures act to enhance stimulated emission and therefore reduce the 

 apparent discrepancy between electron temperatures derived from 

 radio and optical observations, respectively. 



Theoretical calculations by Gingerich and Robert W. Noyes indi- 

 cated the importance of infrared measures of the extreme solar limb 

 and have led to the latter's preparation for an eclipse expedition. 




194 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Gingerich, in collaboration with John Rich of the Harvard Observa- 

 tory, reports the discovery of the absorption edge due to the first ex- 

 cited state of silicon in the solar ultraviolet. Their studies of limb 

 darkening in this ultraviolet region have led to important conclusions 

 concerning the structure of the lower solar chromosphere, which have 

 been confirmed in collaborative studies by Noyes on the infrared. 



Predicting the formation of spectrum lines under rather general 

 conditions of density and temperature is a problem of amazing com- 

 plexity, and the investigations rely heavily on numerical experiments 

 to be examined with analytical theories. Investigations of the transfer 

 of line radiation by multilevel atoms, principally carried out by 

 Eugene H. Avrett and Wolfgang Kalkofen in collaboration with 

 Rybicki, have broken important new ground in the interpretation of 

 stellar spectra. An example of the exciting results to be expected from 

 this program is the fact that Linsky and Avrett have, for the first time, 

 performed sufficiently accurate computations of the profiles of the 

 chromospheric calcium emission lines to permit their use in a direct 

 study of chromospheric structure. Many other problems, hitherto 

 unassailable, will be attacked with these methods. 



In the area of relativity and cosmology, Giovanni G. Fazio and 

 James P. Wright with Floyd W. Stecker have investigated X-ray and 

 gamma-ray production by the interaction of cosmic ray electrons with 

 the 3.5°K universal blackbody radiation field. They concluded that, 

 if the universal radiation field actually exists, the intergalactic cosmic- 

 ray electron intensity must be lower than that observed at the earth. 

 Henri E. Mitler and Stecker have initiated a program to investigate the 

 formation of helium and deuterium at the beginning of a universal 

 big-bang. It is hoped that the helium- 3 and helium-4 abundances and 

 the universal blackbody radiation as now observed will emerge as 

 byproducts of these calculations. 



Mitler has extended his work on the neutron flux in meteoroids to 

 be expected from galactic cosmic rays and from solar flares; this work 

 should give useful information concerning the amount of neutron 

 activity to be expected in meteoroids in space. 



With the hope of understanding the discrete X-ray sources that have 

 recently been discovered by rocket flights, Sachiko Tsuruta has con- 

 tinued her studies of neutron stars, relativistic assemblies of matter 

 with densities up to 10 15 grams per cubic centimeter. She and 

 James Wright have examined the vibrational periods for such stars, 

 finding them to be less than 1/1000 of a second! Wright has shown 

 that relativistic effects place a lower limit on the possible pulsation 

 period of such stars. 




RADIO ASTRONOMY 195 



Myron Lecar continued his theoretical studies of stellar motions in 

 an idealized galaxy. He has obtained an exact solution for a class of 

 stellar orbits in a time-varying gravitational field that has permitted 

 him to demonstrate that a slowly collapsing galaxy could provide the 

 observed high eccentricities of the older stars. He pursued an extensive 

 computational investigation of the motion of the stars perpendicular 

 to the plane of the galaxy and demonstrated the validity of neglecting 

 close encounters in studying the long-time behavior of this model. 

 This important work promises to provide new techniques for studying 

 the evolution of the Galaxy. 



Lecar also initiated, in collaboration with the Yale Observatory, 

 a series of numerical experiments on the dynamical structure of 

 globular star clusters. 



William M. Irvine studied the early conditions in an expanding 

 universe, and the fluctuations of density that may arise at such a stage, 

 in order to examine the early stages in the formation of galaxies and 

 other astronomical systems. 



Work in high-energy physics has progressed with Mitler's calculation 

 of the total number of elementary particles of various species evaporated 

 from excited nuclei, and he developed a new approximation for the 

 partition function of hydrogen. Joseph F. Dolan and Giovanni G. 

 Fazio have completed an extensive study of the polarization to be 

 expected from various types of sources of celestial X-rays, and they 

 conclude that measurements of linear polarization would be an 

 important means of diagnosing the mechanism of X-ray production. 

 Stecker investigated cosmic-ray particle acceleration by low-frequency 

 plasma waves and radio waves and has evaluated the energy spectra 

 to be expected from various models of cosmic-ray sources. 



Donald H. Menzel is continuing several programs in theoretical 

 astrophysics that he started at Harvard College Observatory. 27 He is 

 investigating complex sunspots and associated instabilities, magnetic 

 stars such as the sun that are pumping hydrogen into the external 

 magnetic regions, and the origin of planetary systems. 28 



Many SAO activities depend upon facile use of computers, which in 

 turn depend on special mathematics dealing with computer logic. 

 Theoretical study by Henry D. Friedman of a mathematical concept 

 called linear graphs is an example of this science. 3 



Radio Astronomy 



The Observatory is making a strong entry into the field of radio 

 astronomy. An 85-foot "dish" antenna with a precision surface has 

 been acquired and will be installed on a mount owned by Harvard 




196 SMITHSONIAN YEAR. 1966.— ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



College Observatory. The resulting jointly owned radio telescope 

 will be used by staff scientists of both institutions under the direction 

 of A. Edward Lilley. 



To study the design for a large fully steerable radio antenna, the 

 Cambridge Radio Observatory Committee (CAMROC) has been 

 established by S. Dillon Ripley, President J. A. Stratton of Massachu- 

 setts Institute of Technology, and President Nathan M. Pusey of 

 Harvard University. The Committee is investigating all aspects of 

 construction and operation of a facility with a paraboloidal antenna 

 having a nominal 400-foot diameter. 



Representing SAO on the committee are Fred L. Whipple, Charles 

 A. Lundquist, and A. Edward Lilley; Mario D. Grossi, Carlton G. 

 Lehr, Thomas E. Hoffman, and Carlton W. Tillinghast are scientific 

 and administrative associates. 



The objectives of CAMROC are threefold — scientific, educational, 

 and technological. The number of significant astrophysical problems 

 now susceptible to investigation by radio and radar astronomy has 

 expanded rapidly, but the number of available instruments suitable for 

 these studies has not increased apace. CAMROC is considering an 

 instrument with great versatility to accommodate diverse scientific 

 programs. There is an acute need for more professionals in both radio 

 and radar astronomy. A facility of the sort being studied, if located in 

 or near an academic community, would provide an opportunity for 

 research and graduate training that does not exist today. Such a 

 facility would also be applicable to programs other than purely astro- 

 nomical studies. It would pave the way for design of larger facilities 

 and could be used as an emergency backup in national and international 

 space programs. 



Lilley and Donald H. Menzel are studying the theory of hydrogen 

 emission at radio wavelengths. 29 New and simple expressions have 

 been developed for the intensities of the hydrogen lines of high-series 

 members. Various theories of line broadening were reviewed and 

 improved insults were obtained. Further analysis will apply to the 

 continuous background produced by bound-free and free-free emissions. 



Optical Astronomy- 

 Even with the great strides taken in space and radio astronomy, 

 the fundamental tool of the astronomer is still the ground-based optical 

 telescope. Data provided by telescopic observations are critical to 

 virtually all branches of astronomy. Even the theoretician must have 

 observations against which to test his theories. Because there are 

 too few telescopes and too little observing time available to satisfy 




Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory's new multipurpose Southwest 

 Observatory will be located to the east of the 8572-foot peak of Mt. Hopkins 

 (center). It will house at least three major instruments, including a Baker- 

 Nunn satellite-tracking camera, the world's largest gamma-ray collector, 

 and a good-size conventional telescope particularly suited to spectroscopy. 

 The new facility will join the nearby Kitt Peak National Observatory and 

 the University of Arizona's Lunar-Solar Laboratory in making Tucson one 

 of the leading astronomical areas of the world. 




Smithsonian-built gamma-ray detector is a spark chamber connected to a 

 closed-circuit television system, by which a spark pattern can be registered 

 and telemetered back to earth. Launched from Flight Station of the National 

 Center for Atmospheric Research at Palestine, Texas, May 28, 1966, it was 

 carried 120,000 feet aloft in an 8J^-hour flight. Data analysis is underway. 




OPTICAL ASTRONOMY 197 



the needs of modern astronomy, the Astrophysical Observatory is 

 establishing a new observing station. 



After an extensive search, the Observatory selected what is regarded 

 as the finest site available in North America. Mount Hopkins, in 

 the Coronado National Forest of southern Arizona, appears to offer 

 excellent observing conditions and is close to Tucson, a rapidly de- 

 veloping astronomical center. The National Forest provides a natural 

 buffer precluding encroachment of urban areas with their sky-spoiling 

 lights and smoke. Near by are Kitt Peak National Observatory and 

 the observing facilities of the University of Arizona. 



Immediate plans call for installation of a large light collector to 

 observe Cerenkov radiation generated by gamma rays hitting the 

 upper atmosphere, a medium-sized astronomical telescope for spec- 

 trometry, and a Baker-Nunn camera and laser tracking equipment 

 for observing artificial satellites. Charles A. Tougas has been named 

 Field Manager and will be in charge of site development. 



During the past year, Giovanni G. Fazio and Henry F. Helmken 

 have been searching at night for Cerenkov light from very high-energy 

 gamma rays with the solar furnace at the U.S. Army Quartermaster 

 Corps in Natick, Massachusetts. High-speed counting equipment 

 has improved the electronic stability of the system, but the major 

 limitation still remains the high background light in the night sky 

 from Boston and surrounding communities. This problem will be 

 overcome with establishment of the new light collector on Mount 

 Hopkins. 



Today, supported by modern high-speed computers, the Observa- 

 tory's theoretical astrophysicists have pushed the frontiers of theory 

 to the limit, and badly need confirming observations. For this purpose, 

 David W. Latham and Stephen E. Strom twice visited Mount Wilson 

 Observatory to use the Coude spectrograph of the 100-inch telescope. 

 They exposed 20 plates on Alpha Lyra, covering wavelengths between 

 3200 and 6500 angstroms with dispersions between 1 and 3 A/mm. 

 The plates will be used to improve their analysis of this fundamental 

 standard star. Strom and Latham also obtained photoelectric H7 

 profiles with a resolution of one angstrom for abundance analyses 

 of nine stars — Alpha Canis Majoris, Gamma Geminorum, Alpha 

 Canis Minoris, 63 Tauri, 64 Tauri, 68 Tauri, 8 Comae, HD73666, 

 and Iota Herculis. Combined with photoelectric scans, these measure- 

 ments will be analyzed for accurate values of the surface gravity and 

 effective temperature for these stars. 



A central effort in this empirical program is Latham's development 

 of a photoelectric spectrophotometer for measuring stellar-energy 

 distributions in the range 3000 to 8000 angstroms. This equipment is 




198 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



now being tested on the 61 -inch telescope of the Harvard College 

 Observatory. Latham also continued his fundamental work on the 

 factors that limit the accuracy of high-dispersion photographic spectro- 

 photometry. 



In the continuing flare-star observing program 3 reported last year, 

 Leonard H. Solomon has reduced 115 hours worth of data to light 

 curves. 30 With Sir Bernard Lovell, University of Manchester, England, 

 he deduced a mean light-radio curve for UV-Ceti outbursts. He 

 was unable to find any periodicity for UV-Ceti flares. 



An image sheer allowing spectrograms to be obtained simultaneously 

 for two heights in the solar chromosphere has been used by Robert W. 

 Noyes at the Sacramento Peak Observatory. The data contain 

 information on the dynamics of chromospheric spicules. With J. M. 

 Beckers of Sacramento Peak Observatory, Noyes has started infrared 

 observations of the sun between 10 and 30 microns; and with the Lunar 

 and Planetary Laboratory of the University of Arizona, he has made 

 observations of the center-to-limit variations of the solar continuum 

 flux at wavelengths out to 25 microns. These show that the current 

 descriptions of the vertical temperature structure of the solar atmos- 

 phere place the temperature minimum too deep. 



With David Morrison, Carl Sagan, and James B. Pollack, Thomas E. 

 Hoffman has designed a camera capable of very fine focusing. It will 

 be used for infrared planetary photography on hypersensitized plates 

 at wavelengths up to 1 micron. The completed camera is now being 

 tested. 18 



Fred A. Franklin has observed the earth-lit portion of the moon in 

 two colors to obtain the albedo and phase function of the earth. 31 

 This study, undertaken to resolve the discrepancy between visual 

 observations and satellite measurements, indicates that the average 

 Bond albedo of the earth is about 0.36 in yellow light and some 20% 

 higher in the blue. 



Paul W. Hodge and Frances W. Wright have completed work on 

 their Atlas of the Large Magellanic Cloud. A preliminary edition was 

 printed in June for distribution to some 25 observatories carrying on 

 major programs in Magellanic Cloud research. A formal edition will 

 be published later. 



Thornton L. Page 12 has been preparing to make spectroscopic obser- 

 vations of southern galaxies at the National Astronomical Observatory, 

 Cordoba, Argentina. He will be determining red shifts and internal 

 motions of objects in de Vaucouleur's catalog, quasi-stellar objects, and 

 peculiar galaxies. Extensive modernization of the 61 -inch telescope 

 has been necessary before the observations could be undertaken. 




HISTORICAL ASTRONOMY 199 



A new type of satellite-tracking camera built by the Observatory 

 for geodetic measurements is now in operation near Athens, Greece, 

 under a cooperative agreement with the National Technical University 

 of Athens. 3 A modified K-50, the camera is the first of three to join 

 the Smithsonian's network of Astrophysical Observing Stations. The 

 others will be located at Curacao, in the Netherlands Antilles, and in 

 Shiraz, Iran. The lens system, originally designed for aerial pho- 

 tography by James G. Baker of Harvard College Observatory, has 

 been mounted by Observatory engineers on a pedestal suitable for 

 satellite tracking. 



The network of Astrophysical Observing Stations was improved 

 by the installation of new precision time standards. 3 Nine stations now 

 have the new EECO clocks in operation, thereby increasing potential 

 observing accuracy from 1 millisecond to 0.1 millisecond. 



In addition to their routine satellite-tracking assignments, the stations 

 were able to secure several particularly significant series of photographs. 3 

 Early this year, the South Africa station photographed part of the 

 Gemini 5 rocket as it reentered the atmosphere and disintegrated. 

 Later, the same station observed the injection and inflation of the 

 PAGEOS geodetic balloon satellite. In December, the Argentina 

 station caught Gemini 6 and Gemini 7 as they made their historic 

 rendezvous in space. 



Historical Astronomy 



Charles A. Whitney prepared an article tracing the development of 

 the astronomical concept of the universe through Herschel's discovery 

 of nebulosity, to Hubble's proof that spiral neublae are extragalactic 

 systems, to the recent identification of quasars. The article delineates 

 the substantial revolution in astronomical thought following each of 

 these identifications of a specific and a new kind of astronomical object. 

 He also initiated a study of Laplace's nebular hypothesis, its relation 

 to the theoretical work of Kant and the observational work of Herschel, 

 and the evolution of Laplace's expression of this hypothesis through 

 the six editions of his work published from 1795 to 1835. Whitney 

 collected material to prepare a variorum edition of Laplace's Systems of 

 the World. 



Owen J. Gingerich recomputed the planetary section of Kepler's 

 Rudolphine Tables; a remarkably high internal accuracy, as well as 

 excellent predicting ability for planetary positions, had been displayed. 

 He translated several chapters of the Rudolphine Tables and has begun 

 a full-scale translation of Kepler's Astronomia Nova. This project is 

 assisted by a Latin transduction computer program, the dictionary of 




200 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



which currently contains 2800 Latin roots actually used in Kepler's 

 writing. Gingerich is continuing investigations of Kepler's lunar 

 tables and a study of 13th-century Alphonsine Tables? 2 



Hawkins obtained stereoscopic aerial surveys of Stonehenge in 

 southern England and of Callanish in Scotland. 33 From these surveys 

 accurate plans have been drawn that are superior to those previously 

 available. These plans have been used to confirm the sun and moon 

 alignments found between the stones and post holes at these monu- 

 ments. 34 



Central Bureaus 



The Central Bureau for Satellite Geodesy, under the guidance of 

 executive director Jan Rolff, has strengthened international cooperation 

 in satellite geodesy. 35 The Bureau was instrumental in arranging 

 cooperation between SAO's satellite-tracking program and foreign 

 stations, particularly in eastern and western Europe. 



The Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams, 4 under the direction 

 of Gingerich, distributed 47 Circulars carrying information about 

 supernovae, comets, asteroids, and unusual stars. The most extensive 

 activity resulted from the spectacular sun-grazing comet Ikeya-Seki, 

 for which 1 1 Circulars were issued in a period of 6 weeks. In addition 

 to the postcard Circulars distributed to about 625 subscribers in 50 

 countries, the Bureau sent over a dozen "telegram books" to various 

 of its 120 subscribers in 40 countries. Most of the foreign subscribers 

 are serviced by the AGIWARN system of the International Ursigram 

 and World Days Service. Richard B. Southworth and Brian G. 

 Marsden served as associate directors of the Bureau. 



Staff Changes 



One of the Observatory's distinguished scientists, Leo Goldberg, 

 resigned upon his appointment as the new director of the Harvard 

 College Observatory. His predecessor in that position, Donald H. 

 Menzel, joined the SAO staff. 



The scientific staff of the Astrophysical Observatory was increased 

 during the year by physicists Willard R. Chappell and Costas 

 Papaliolios; astrophysicist Myron Lecar; geologist John A. Wood; 

 astronomers Guiseppe Forti and Brian G. Marsden; celestial mechani- 

 cians Salah E. Hamid and Jean Meffroy. Richard W. McCarthy joined 

 the staff as personnel manager, and Henry D. Friedman as manager of 

 the data processing department, which now includes a new computer 

 division under the supervision of Lauri E. Kujanpaa. 



Consultants to the Observatory during the year were Giuseppe 

 Colombo, Giorgio Fiocco, Yusukc Hagihara, David G. Hummer, 




PAPERS PRESENTED OR PUBLISHED 201 



William M. Kaula, Colin S. L. Keay, Czeslaw P. Kentzer, Yoshihide 

 Kozai, A. Edward Lilley, Irving Michelson, Eduardo O. Patino, A. E. 

 Ringwood, Juan Roderer, Winfield W. Salisbury, Mario R. Schaffner, 

 William E. Strange, Bhuwan M. Tripathy, Francis X. Tuoti, V. 

 Vanysek, and George Veis. 



In 1965, the Observatory initiated in cooperation with the National 

 Academy of Sciences/National Research Council its postdoctoral 

 fellowship program for research associates. The first four appointees 

 were Thornton L. Page, director of the Wesleyan University Observa- 

 tory, Robert H. McCorkell of M.I.T.; Ralph F. Baierlein of Jefferson 

 Laboratory, Harvard University; and Ladislav Sehnal of the Astro- 

 nomical Institute of Czechoslovakia. Richard Haefner and Franco 

 Verniani resigned. 



Staff Papers 



Presented or Published 

 July 1965 through June 1966 



Anderson, P. H., Lehr, C. G., Maestre, L. A., Halsey, H. W., and 

 Snyder, G. L. The two-way transmission of a ruby-laser beam 

 between earth and a retro-reflecting satellite. Proc. IEEE, vol. 

 54, p. 426, 1966. 



Avrett, E. H. Source function equality in multiplets. Astrophys. 

 Journ., vol. 144, pp. 59-75, 1966. 



and Hummer, D. G. Non-coherent scattering II: Line 



formation with a frequency independent source function. Monthly 

 Notices, Roy. Astron. Soc, vol. 130, pp. 295-331, 1965. 



Beckers, J. M., Noyes, R. W., and Pasachoff, J. M. New observa- 

 tions of solar chromospheric spicules [abstract]. Astron. Journ., 

 vol. 71, p. 155, 1966. 



Briggs, R. E. See Jacchia, Verniani, and Briggs. 



Chappell, W. R. See also Glass and Chappell. 



and Brittin, W. E. Quantum kinetic equations for a multi- 

 component system of charged particles and photons. Phys. Rev., 

 vol. 146, pp. 75-91, 1966. 



, Brittin, W. E., and Glass, S. J. The interaction of radiation 



with charged particles I. Nuovo Cimento, vol. 38, pp. 1186- 

 1191, 1965. 



and Swenson. R. J. Guessing kinetic equations. Phys. Fluids, 



vol. 8, pp. 1195-1197, 1965. 



Colombo, G. See also Shapiro, Lautman, and Colombo. 



230^157 — 66 17 




202 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Colombo, G. Rotation period of the planet Mercury. Nature, vol. 

 208, p. 575, 1965. 



— . Recent developments in the theory of rotation of Mercury 

 and Venus. Presented at NATO Advanced Study Institute, 

 Newcastle-upon-Tyne, April 1965. 



Comerford, M. F., and Thomas, D. A. Substructure and mechanical 

 properties of a drawn and annealed iron-silicon alloy. Trans. 

 Met. Soc. AIME, vol. 233, pp. 1236-1243, 1965. 



Cook, A. F., and Franklin, F. A. Rediscussion of Maxwell's Adams 

 prize essay on the stability of Saturn's rings, II. Astron. Journ., 

 vol. 71, pp. 10-19, 1966. 



Davis, R. J. The Celescope optical system for the orbiting astronomical 

 observatory. Presented at the Conference on Optics in Space, 

 University of Southampton, Southampton, September 1965. 



. The use of the Uvicon-Celescope television system for ultra- 

 violet astronomical photometry. Presented at the Symposium on 

 Photo-electronic Image Devices as Aids to Scientific Observation, 

 Imperial College of Science and Technology, University of London, 

 London, September 1965. 



Factors affecting the transmittance of lithium fluoride and 



barium fluoride in the vacuum ultraviolet. Journ. Opt. Soc. Amer,, 



vol. 56, pp. 837-839, 1966. 

 Dodd, R., Van Schmus, R., and Marvin, U. Merrihueite, a new 



alkali-ferromagnesium silicate from the Mezo-Madaras chondrite. 



Science, vol. 149, pp. 972-974, 1965. 

 Dolan, J. F. Stellar molecular abundances: I. Polyatomic molecules. 



Astrophys. Journ., vol. 142, pp. 1629-1632, 1965. 

 — . An experimental method of determining the polarization of 



celestial x-rays [abstract]. Astron. Journ., vol. 71, p. 160, 1966. 

 Fazio, G. G. See also Helmken and Fazio. 

 , Stecker, F. W., and Wright, J. P. Cosmic blackbody 



radiation, high-energy electrons, and the origin of isotropic x-ray 



and gamma radiation. Astrophys. Journ., vol. 144, pp. 611-614, 



1966. 

 Fireman, E. L. Evidence for extraterrestrial particles in polar ice. 



Presented at the Symposium on Meteor Orbits and Dust, Cam- 

 bridge, Massachusetts, August 1966. 

 . Neutron exposure ages of meteorites. Zeitschr. fur Naturf., 



vol. 21 A, pp. 1138-1146, 1966. 

 Fleischer, R. L., Naeser, C. W., Price, P. B., Walker, R. M., and 



Marvin, U Fossil particle tracks and uranium distributions 



in minerals of the Vaca Muerta mesosiderite. Science, vol. 148. 



pp. 629-632, 1965. 




PAPERS PRESENTED OR PUBLISHED 203 



Frankljn, F. A. See Cook and Franklin. 



Gaposchkin, E. M. A new determination of tesseral harmonics of 

 the geopotential and station coordinates from Baker-Nunn ob- 

 servations. Presented at the AGU meeting, Washington, D.G., 

 March 1966. 



. A dynamical solution for the tesseral harmonics of the 



geopotential, and station coordinates using Baker-Nunn data. 

 Presented at Vllth COSPAR International Space Science Sym- 

 posium, Vienna, May 1966. 



Gingerich, O. Lunar visibilities in ancient Babylon. Isis, vol. 56, 

 p. 69, 1965. 



. Eleven-digit regular sexagesimals and their reciprocals. 



Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc, vol. 55, pt. 8, 1965. 



. The great comet of 1965. Atlantic Monthly, vol. 217, pp. 



57-62, 1966. 



. Limb darkening for a grid of model stellar atmospheres. 



Astrophys. Journ., vol. 144, pp. 1213-1215, 1966. 



and Rich, J. C. Metallic continuous absorption coefficients in 



the solar ultraviolet [abstract]. Astron. Journ., vol. 71, p. 161, 

 1966. 



Glass, S. J., and Chappell, W. R. The interaction of radiation with 

 charged particles II. Nuovo Cimento, vol. 38B, pp. 79-88, 1966. 



Goldberg, L., Newson, G., Parkinson, W. H., and Reeves, E. M. 

 A study of broad absorption features in the solar spectrum. Pre- 

 sented at the AAS meeting, Ann Arbor, Michigan, August 1965. 

 [Abstracted in Astron. Journ., vol. 70, p. 676, 1965.] 



Grossi, M. D. Preliminary results from a VHF meteor radar system 

 for the measurement of 3-dimension wind velocities in the lower 

 ionosphere. Presented at the 2nd Conference on Direct Aeronomic 

 Measurements in the Lower Ionosphere, Univ. of Illinois, Urbana, 

 September 1965. 



. Guided propagation in the ionosphere and its potential use 



for global communications. Electronic Progress, vol. 9, no. 2, 

 pp. 1-12, 1965. 



and Barker, J. I. Guided propagation modes in the lower 



ionosphere and satellite-to-satellite HF-VHF communication ex- 

 periments. Presented at 2nd Symposium on Radio-Astronomical 

 and Satellite Studies of the Atmosphere, Boston, October 1965. 



• and Smith, B. M. Computer simulation of HF and VHF 



waveguidance phenomena in the lower ionosphere. Presented at 

 fall URSI meeting, Hanover, New Hampshire, October 1965. 




204 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Hawkins, G. S. See also Wolfe, Battan, Fleming, Hawkins, and Skornik. 



. Callanish, a Scottish Stonehenge. Science, vol. 147, pp. 



127-130, 1965. 

 . Sun, moon, men and stones. Amer. Scientist, vol. 53, pp. 



391-408, 1965. 



. Stonehenge physics. Physics Today, vol. 19, pp. 38-42, 1966. 



. Stonehenge. In Book of knowledge annual yearbook, p- 



333. New York: Grolier, 1966. 



and Moore, J. F. The life of a star. New York: Holt, 



Rinehart, and Winston, 1965. 32 pp. 



and White, J. B. Stonehenge decoded. New York: Double- 



day and Co., 1965. 194 pp. 

 Helmken, H. F., and Fazio, G. G. Vidicon spark chamber detector 



for gamma-ray astronomy. IEEE Trans, on Nuclear Science, vol. 



NS-13, pp. 486-492, February 1966. 

 Hodge, P. W. See also Wright and Hodge. 

 . The location of star formation in galaxies. Science, vol. 150, 



pp. 374-375, 1965. 

 . The mass of the galaxy. Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific, vol. 78, 



pp. 72-74, 1966. 



— . Newly-discovered clusters of the Large Magellanic Cloud 

 [abstract]. Astron. Journ., vol. 71, pp. 164-165, 1966. 

 . Surface photometry of the Sculptor Dwarf Galaxy. Astron. 



Journ., vol. 71, pp. 204-205, 1966. 

 and Brownlee, D. E. Photographic isophotometry of galaxies. 



Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific, vol. 78, pp. 125-131, 1966. 

 and Hitchcock, J. L. Three-dimensional shape of irregular 



galaxies. Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific, vol. 78, pp. 79-80, 1966. 



and Wright, F. W. New variable stars in the Large Magel- 

 lanic Cloud. Astron. Journ., vol. 71, pp. 131-132, 1966. 



. On the chemical compositions of the interiors of possibly 



cosmic particles and the problem of the origin of naturally occurring 

 iron-rich spherules. Presented at the Symposium on Meteor Orbits 

 and Dust, Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 1965. 



Irvine, W. M. Multiple scattering by large particles. Astrophys. 

 Journ., vol. 142, pp. 1563-1575, 1965. 



. The distribution of photon optical paths in a scattering 



atmosphere [abstract]. Astron. Journ., vol. 70, p. 679, 1965. 

 — . Multiple scattering by large particles [abstract]. IUGG 



Monogr. no. 28, p. 11, 1965. 




PAPERS PRESENTED OR PUBLISHED 205 



. Infrared optical characteristics of ice spheres. Presented at 



the Symposium on Meteor Orbits and Dust, Cambridge, Massa- 

 chusetts, August 1965. 



Diffuse reflection and transmission by clouds and haze layers 



[abstract]. Trans. Amer. Geophys. Union, vol. 47, p. 13, 1966. 

 Jacchia, L. G. Atmospheric structure and its variations at heights 



above 200 km. In CIRA 1965, COSPAR International Reference 



Atmosphere, pp. 293-313, Amsterdam: North-Holland Publ. Co., 



1965. 

 . Remarks on a paper by L. Broglio. Nuovo Cimento, vol. 



40B, pp. 314 and 317, 1965. 

 . Solar plasma velocity, exospheric temperature, and geo- 



magnetic activity. Journ. Geophys. Res., vol. 70, pp. 4385-4386, 

 1965. 



. [Review] Space physics with artificial satellites, by Ya. L. 



Al'pert, A. V. Gurevich, and L. P. Pitaevskii. Science, vol. 150, 

 pp. 875-876, 1965. 

 . Density variations in the heterosphere. Ann. de Geophys., 



vol. 22, pp. 75-85, 1966. 

 . Verniani, F., and Briggs, R. E. Selected results from 



precision-reduced Super-Schmidt meteors. Presented at the Sym- 

 posium on Meteor Orbits and Dust, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 

 August 1965. 



Kalkofen, W. See Strom and Kalkofen. 



Kohnlein, W. Corrections to station coordinates and to nonzonal 

 harmonics from Baker-Nunn observations. Presented at Vllth 

 COSPAR International Space Science Symposium, Vienna, May 

 1966. 



Lautman, D. A. See Shapiro, Lautman, and Colombo. 



Lecar, M. Validity of the Vlasov equation for a one-dimensional 

 self-gravitating gas. Presented at the 14th International Astro- 

 physical Symposium, Liege, June 1966. 



Lehr, C. G. See Anderson, Lehr, Maestre, Halsey, and Snyder. 



Liller, M. H., Welther, B. L., and Liller, W. Angular expansion 

 of planetary nebulae. Astrophys. Journ., vol. 144, pp. 280-290, 

 1966. 



Loeser, R. See Avrett and Loeser. 



Lovell, B., and Solomon, L. H. Correlation of radio emission with 

 the optical flares on UV Ceti. Obs., vol. 86, pp. 16-18, 1966. 



Lundquist, C. A. Satellite geodesy at the Smithsonian Astrophysical 

 Observatory. Presented at the American Society for Surveying 

 and Mapping and the American Society of Photogrammetry 

 Convention, Washington, D.C., March 1966. 




206 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Lundquist, C. A. Standard earth parameters for use in orbit determina- 

 tion. Presented to the Seminar on Guidance Theory and Trajectory 

 Analysis, NASA Electronics Research Center, Cambridge, Mas- 

 sachusetts, June 1966. 



Maestre, L. A. See Anderson, Lehr, Maestre, Halsey, and Snyder. 



Marsden, B. G. Revision of the astronomical constants. Handbook 

 British Astron. Assoc, vol. 66, pp. 64—65, 1965. 



. The great comet of 1965. Sky and Telescope, vol. 30, pp. 



332-337, 1965. 



and Cameron, A. G. W., eds. International Conference on 



the Earth-Moon System. New York: Plenum Press, 1966. 



Marvin, U. See also Dodd, Van Schmus, and Marvin; and Fleischer, 

 Naeser, Price, Walker, and Marvin. 



, Fleischer, R. L., Price, P. B., and Walker, R. M. Studies 



of iron and stony-iron meteorites by nuclear particle track analysis. 

 Presented at the XXth International Congress of Pure and Ap- 

 plied Chemistry, Moscow, July 1965. 



and Marvin, T. C. A re-examination of the crater near 



Crestone, Colorado. Meteoritics, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-10, May 1966. 

 Merrihue, C. M. Meteoritic trace element determinations by mass 



spectrometry of neutron-irradiated samples. Presented at the 



XXth International Congress of Pure and Applied Chemistry, 



Moscow, July 1965. 

 . The origin of anomalous Xe 129 in meteorites. Zeitschr. 



fur Naturf., vol. 20A, pp. 961-962, 1965. 



Xenon and krypton in the Bruderheim meteorite. Journ. 



Geophys. Res., vol. 71, pp. 263-313, 1966. 



Noyes, R. W. See Beckers, Noyes, and Pasachoff. 



Nozawa, Y. A digital television system for satellite-borne ultraviolet 

 photometer. Presented at the Symposium on Photo-electronic 

 Image Devices as Aids to Scientific Observation, Imperial College 

 of Science and Technology, University of London, London, Sep- 

 tember 1965. 



Ohring, G., Sagan, C, et al. Meteorological experiments for manned 

 earth orbiting missions. Geophysics Corporation of America 

 Tech. Rep. No. 66-1 0-N, 1966. 



Pollack, J. B. See also Sagan and Pollack. 



and Sagan, C. The infrared limb-darkening of Venus. 



Journ. Geophys. Res., vol. 70, pp. 4403-4426, 1965. 



Sagan, C. See also Ohring and Sagan; Pollack and Sagan; Shklovskii 

 and Sagan; Swan and Sagan; and Walker and Sagan. 




PAPERS PRESENTED OR PUBLISHED 207 



. Primordial ultraviolet synthesis of nucleoside phosphates. 



In The Origins of Prebiological Systems, ed. by S. W. Fox, pp. 207- 



219. New York: Academic Press, 1965. 

 . High-resolution planetary photography and the detection of 



life. In Proceedings of the Caltech-JPL Lunar and Planetary 

 Conference, ed. by H. Brown, G. J. Stanley, D. O. Muhleman, and 

 G. Munch, pp. 279-287. California Institute of Technology and 

 JPL Publ., 1966. 



. Review of Mars, by R. S. Richardson. Amer. Scientist, 



vol. 53, pp. 478A-480A, 1966. 



. On radiative transfer in the atmosphere of Jupiter. Trans. 



Int. Astron. Union, vol. 12B, p. 215, 1966. 



. Mariner IV observations and the possibility of iron oxides 



on the Martian surface. Icarus, vol. 5, pp. 102-103, 1966. 

 . The photometric properties of Mercury. Astrophys. Journ., 



vol. 144, pp. 1218-1220, 1966. 



. Planetary environments and biology. Astronaut, and Aero- 

 naut., vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 12-22, 1966. 



. [Extensive contributions (chaps. 3, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, and 



28 authored singly or with others) to Biology and the exploration 

 of Mars, ed. by C. Pittendrigh, W. Vishniac, and P. Pearman.] 

 Nat. Acad. Sci. Nat. Res. Council Publ. 1296, Washington, D.C., 

 516 pp. 1966. 

 Hanst, P. L., and Young, A. T. Further remarks on Martian 



N0 2 . Planetary and Space Science, vol. 13, pp. 1003-1004, 1965. 



, Kilston, S. D., and Drummond, R. R. A search for life on 



earth at kilometer resolution. Icarus, vol. 5, pp. 79-98, 1966. 



and Leonard, J. Planets. Time-Life Science Book, 1966. 



and Pollack, J. B. An analysis of microwave observations of 



Venus. Journ. Res. NBS, vol. 69D, pp. 1583-1584, 1965. 



and Pollack, J. B. Properties of the clouds of Venus. In 



Proceedings of the Caltech-JPL Lunar and Planetary Confer- 

 ence, ed. by H. Brown, G. J. Stanley, D. O. Muhleman, and G. 

 Munch, pp. 155-163. California Institute of Technology and 

 JPL Publ., 1966. 



. Radio and radar evidence on the structure and composition of 



the Martian surface [abstract]. In Proceedings of the Caltech-JPL 

 Lunar and Planetary Conference, ed. by H. Brown, G. J. 

 Stanley, D. O. Muhleman, and G. Munch, pp. 255-256. Cal- 

 ifornia Institute of Technology and JPL Publ., 1966. 



■. On the nature of the clouds and the origin of the surface tem- 

 perature of Venus [abstract]. Astron. Journ. vol. 71, p. 178, 1966. 




208 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Sagan, C. and Walker, R. G. The infrared detectability of Dyson 

 civilizations. Astrophys. Journ., vol. 144, pp. 1216-1218, 1966. 



Salisbury, W. W. Generation of infrared and visible light by free 

 electrons. Presented at Boulder Millimeter Wave and Far Infrared 

 Conference, Estes Park, Colorado, August 1965. 



. Visible light from free electrons in vacuum. Presented at 



Technical Symposium, General Motors Defence Research Labo- 

 ratories, Santa Barbara, California, October 1965. 



Shapiro, I. I., Lautman, D. A., and Colombo, G. Dynamics of 

 orbiting dust particles. Presented at the Symposium on Meteor 

 Orbits and Dust, Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 1965. 



Shklovskii, I. S., and Sagan, C. Intelligent life in the universe. 

 San Francisco: Holdenday, Inc., 1966. 



Solomon, L. H. See Lovell and Solomon. 



Stecker, F. W. See Fazio, Stecker, and Wright. 



Strom, S. E., and Kalkofen, W. The effect of departures from LTE 

 on stellar continuum fluxes in the spectral-type range B5-A0. 

 Astron. Journ. vol. 144, pp. 76-87, 1966. 



Swan, P. R., and Sagan, C. Martian landing sites for the Voyager 

 mission. Journ. Spacecraft and Rockets, vol. 2, pp. 18-24, 1965. 



Tilles, D. Searches for noble gas evidence of cosmic dust. Presented 

 at the XXth International Congress of Pure and Applied Chemistry, 

 Moscow, July 1965. 



. Some studies of separated fractions of low accumulation-rate 



dust. Presented at the Symposium on Meteor Orbits and Dust, 

 Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 1965. 



Atmospheric noble gases for extraterrestrial dust [Reply to 



comments of R. A. Schmidt]. Science, vol. 151, p. 1015, 1966. 

 Tsuruta, S. Lack of homology in the oscillations of neutron stars. 

 Nature, vol. 207, pp. 470-472, 1965. 



and Cameron, A. G. W. Cooling of neutron stars. Nature, 



vol. 207, pp. 364-366, 1965. 



and Cameron, A. G. W. Composition of matter in nuclear 



statistical equilibrium at high densities. Canadian Journ. Phys., 



vol. 43, pp. 2056-2077, 1965. 

 Verniani, F. See also Jacchia, Verniani, and Briggs. 

 . Comments on Ceplecha's paper "Classification of meteor 



orbits.'' 1 Presented at the Symposium on Meteor Orbits and Dust, 



Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 1965. 

 Walker, R. G., and Sagan, C. The ionospheric model of the Venus 



microwave emission: An obituary. Icarus, vol. 5, pp. 105-123, 



1966. 




PAPERS PRESENTED OR PUBLISHED 209 



Wang, C.-Y. Some geophysical implications from gravity and heat 

 flow data. Journ. Geophys. Res., vol. 70, pp. 5629-5634, 1965. 



. On the calcite transitions to 20 kilobars [abstract]. Trans. 



Amer. Geophys. Union, vol. 47, p. 178, 1966. 



. Earth's zonal deformations. Journ. Geophys. Res., vol. 71, 



pp. 1713-1720, 1966. 



Welther, B. L. See Liller, Welther, and Liller. 



Whipple, F. L. Knowledge and understanding of the physical universe 

 as determinants of man's progress. Presented at the Bicentennial 

 Celebration, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., Septem- 

 ber 1965. 



— . Comets. In Advances in the Astronautical Sciences, vol. 



19, ed. by G. W. Morganthaler and R. C. Morra, Amer. Astro- 

 naut. Soc, Washington, D.C., pp. 119-134, 1965. 



. Chondrules: Suggestion concerning the origin. Science, 



vol. 153, pp. 54-56, 1966. 

 . On the satellite geodesy program at the Smithsonian Astro- 



physical Observatory. Presented at the Vllth COSPAR Inter- 

 national Space Science Symposium, Vienna, May 1966. 



White, J. B. See Hawkins and White. 



Whitney, C. A. Physical basis for the interpretation of the continuous 

 spectra of pulsating variable stars. Presented at the 5th Sym- 

 posium of Cosmical Gas Dynamics, September 1965. 



Wolfe, W. C, Battan, L. J., Fleming, R. H., Hawkins, G. S., and 

 Skornik, H. Earth science and space science. Boston: D. C. 

 Heath Publ. Co., 1966. 



Wood, J. A. Meteorites and asteroids. In Advances in the astro- 

 nautical sciences, vol. 19, ed. by G. W. Morganthaler and R. C. 

 Morra, pp. 99-118. Washington, D.C.: Amer. Astronaut. Soc, 

 1965. 



. Metal grains in chondritic meteorites. Nature, vol. 208, 



pp. 1085-1086, 1965. 



Wright, F. W. See also Hodge and Wright. 



and Hodge, P. W. Studies of particles for extraterrestrial 



origin. 4. Microscopic spherules from recent volcanic eruptions. 

 Journ. Geophys. Res., vol. 70, pp. 3889-3898, 1965. 



Wright, J. P. See also Fazio, Stecker, and Wright. 



. Pulsation periods of general relativistic objects. Nature, vol. 



208, p. 65, 1965. 



Special Reports 



Special Reports of the Astrophysical Observatory distribute catalogs 

 of satellite observations, orbital data, and preliminary results of data 




210 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



prior to journal publication. Numbers 181 through 215, issued during 

 the year, contain the following material: 



181 (August 9, 1965). Brightness changes in periodic comets, by 

 F. Whipple and D. Douglas-Hamilton. 



1 82 (August 11, 1 965) . On the physics and splitting of cometary 

 nuclei, by F. Whipple and R. Stefanik. 



183 (September 14, 1965). Catalog of precisely reduced simultaneous 

 observations (No. S-l): Satellite 1960 Iota 2 (Echo 1 rocket body) 

 for Nov. 17 and Dec. 28, 1964; Satellite 1961 Delta 1 (Explorer 9) 

 for June 5-Aug. 6, Oct. 1 and Dec. 6, 1961, and Feb. 9-Mar. 1, 

 1962; Satellite 1961 Alpha Delta 1 (Midas 4) for May 30-July 14, 

 1962, June 11-28, July 1-Aug. 6, Oct. 26-29, and Nov. 2-28, 1963, 

 and Feb. 9-Dec. 5, 1964; Satellite 1962 Alpha Epsilon 1 (Telstar 1) 

 for Oct. 30-31, 1962, and Aug. 14-24, 1963; Satellite 1962 Beta 

 Mu 1 (Anna IB) for Nov. 17-21 and Dec. 19-21, 1962, Feb. 28, 

 Apr. 22, Sept. 14, Nov. 22, and Dec. 9-21, 1963; Satellite 1963 

 30Afor Dec. 6-25, 1964; Satellite 1963 30D (Balloon) for Jan. 12- 

 Feb. 8, Apr. 4-June 13, and Sept. 13-Dec. 30, 1964; Satellite 1963 

 53 A (Explorer 19) for Nov. 15-25, 1964; and Satellite 1964 38A 

 (Elektron 3) for Dec. 6 and 8, 1964, prepared by R. Wells. 



184 (September 20, 1965). Density variations in the heterosphere, by 

 L. Jacchia. 



185 (September 3, 1965). Catalog of precisely reduced observations 

 (No. P-14): Satellites 1959 Alpha 1 (Vanguard 2), 1959 Eta 1 

 (Vanguard 3), 1960 Iota 2 (Echo 1 rocket body), 1961 Delta 1 

 (Explorer 9), 1961 Omicron 1 (Transit 4A), 1961 Omicron 2 

 (Injun Solar Radiation 3), 1961 Alpha Delta 1 (Midas 4), 1962 

 Alpha Epsilon 1 (Telstar 1) for Jan. 1-Mar. 31, 1963; Satellite 1962 

 Beta Upsilon 1 (Relay 1) for Dec. 16, 1962-Mar. 31, 1963. 



186 (September 6, 1965). Determination of the absolute space direc- 

 tions between Baker-Nunn camera stations, by L. Aardoom, A. 

 Girnius, and G. Veis. 



187 (October 11, 1965). Transmission coefficient of the Baker-Nunn 

 optical system, by F. Young and K. Hebb. 



188 (October 13, 1965). The rotation of the planet Mercury, by G. 

 Colombo and I. Shapiro (Revised November 15, 1965, and pub- 

 lished as No. 188R). 



189 (October 20, 1965). Determination of station coordinates from 

 optical observations of artificial satellites, by W. Kohnlein. 



190 (October 21, 1965). Some recent accurate laser satellite-range 

 measurements, by P. Anderson, C. Lehr, and L. Maestre. 



191 (October 22, 1965). Observation of the GT-5 rocket-body re- 

 entry — preliminary analysis, by L. Solomon. 




PAPERS PRESENTED OR PUBLISHED 211 



192 (November 8, 1965). Aanlysis of artificial meteoritic spherules, 

 by F. Wright and P. Hodge. 



193 (November 12, 1965). Atmospheric densities and temperatures 

 from the drag analysis of the San Marco satellite, by L. Jacchia 

 and F. Verniani. 



194 (November 15, 1965). On the accuracy of the gravitational po- 

 tential as derived from camera observations of artificial satellites, 

 by W. Kohnlein. 



195 (December 10, 1965). Statistical evidence of the masses and 

 evolution of galaxies, by T. Page. 



196 (December 14, 1965). Radiation spikes in H II regions, by T. 

 Page. 



197 (January 24, 1966). Fluctuations and correlations in the expand- 

 ing universe, by P. Eltgroth. 



198 (January 28, 1966). Geometric structure of the earth's gravita- 

 tional field as derived from artificial satellites, by W. Kohnlein. 



199 (February 3, 1966). Atmospheric densities and temperatures 

 from precisely reduced observations of the Explorer IX satellite, 

 by M. Roemer. 



201 (February 18, 1966). Kernel representations in the solution of 

 line-transfer problems, by E. Avrett and R. Loeser. 



202 (February 21, 1966). Observations of Gemini 6-Gemini 7 

 rendezvous, by J. Latimer. 



203 (March 4, 1966). Cassini's second and third laws, by G. Colombo. 



204 (March 11, 1 966) . Particle evaporation from excited nuclei, 

 by H. Mitler. 



205 (March 25, 1966). Photographic measurements of the energy 

 distribution in the beam of a ruby laser, by C. Lehr, L. Maestre, 

 and P. Anderson. 



206 (March 28, 1966). A suggestion as to the origin of chondrules, 

 by F. Whipple. 



207 (April 1, 1966). The shape and location of the diurnal bulge 

 in the upper atmosphere, by L. Jacchia and J. Slowey. 



208 (April 4, 1966). Satellite orbital data: Satellites 1958 Alpha 

 (Explorer 1), 1959 Alpha 1 (Vanguard 2), 1959 Eta 1 (Vanguard 

 3), 1960 Iota 1 (Echo 1), 1960 Xi 1 (Explorer 8), 1961 Delta 1 

 (Explorer 9), 1962 Alpha Epsilon 1 (Telstar 1), 1962 Beta Mu 1 

 (Anna IB), 1962 Beta Tau 2 (Injun 3), 1962 Beta Upsilon 1 (Re- 

 lay 1), 1963 13A (Telstar 2), 1963 26A (Geophysical Research), 

 and 1963 30D for Jan. 1-Mar. 31, 1964; Satellite 1963 53A 

 (Explorer 19) for Dec. 19, 1963-Mar. 31, 1964; Satellite 1964 

 4A (Echo 2) for Jan. 29-Mar. 31, 1964; and Satellite 1964 5A 




212 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



(Saturn 5) for Jan. 30-Mar. 31, 1964, prepared under the super- 

 vision of B. Miller. 



209 (April 5, 1966). Satellite orbital data: Satellites 1958 Alpha 1 

 (Explorer 1), 1959 Alpha 1 (Vanguard 2), 1959 Eta (Vanguard 3), 

 1960 Iota 1 (Echo 1), 1960 Xi 1 (Explorer 8), 1962 Alpha Epsilon 

 1 (Telstar 1), 1962 Beta Mu 1 (Anna IB), 1962 Beta Tau 2 (Injun 

 3), 1962 Beta Upsilon 1 (Relay 1), 1963 13A (Telstar 2), 1963 

 26A (Geophysics Research), 1963 30D, 1963 53A (Explorer 19), 

 1964 4A (Echo 2), and 1964 5A (Saturn 5) for Apr. 1-July 1, 1964, 

 prepared under the supervision of B. Miller. 



210 (May 12, 1966). A study of flare stars, by L. Solomon. 



211 (May 13, 1966). Measurements of satellite range with a ruby 

 laser, by C. Lehr, L. Maestre, and P. Anderson. 



212 (May 20, 1966). The polarization of celestial x-rays, by J. Dolan. 



213 (May 27, 1966). Some new algorithms for stellar structure, by 

 P. Usher. 



214 (June 10, 1966). The decay of Satellite 1965 79A, by W. Hirst. 



215 (June 20, 1966). Satellite tracking with a laser, by C. Lehr. 



NOTES 



[For explanation of notes, see footnote, page 181.] 



1 Supported in part by grant NGR 09-015-021 from the National Aeronautics 

 and Space Administration (NASA). 



2 Supported in addition by the grant AF 65-531 from the U.S. Air Force (USAF) 

 and by the Smithsonian Institution Hodgkins Fund. 



3 Supported by NASA grant NsG 87. 



4 Supported in part by the International Astronomical Union. 



5 Supported by grant GP-2999 from the National Science Foundation (NSF). 

 "Supported by NASA grant NsG 536 and NASA contract NSR-09-01 5-033. 



7 Supported in part by NASA contract NASr-158 and by National Bureau of 

 Standards agreement CST-7332, both with Harvard University. 



8 Supported in part by NASA contract NAS 9-4873. 



9 Supported by USAF contract AF 19(628)-3248. 

 io Supported by NASA grant NsG 291-62. 



11 Supported in part by NASA grant NsG 460 to Harvard University. 



12 Supported by the National Academy of Sciences. 



is Supported in part by NASA grant NsG 282-63 to Dr. Frondel of Harvard. 

 u Supported by NASA grants NGR 09-015-025 and NsG 87. 




NOTES 213 



15 Supported in part by the University of Hawaii, Institute of Geophysics. 



is Supported by USAF contract AF 19(628)-4203 from the Office of Aerospace 

 Research. 



17 Supported in part by NASA grant NsG 64-60 to Harvard University. 



is Supported by NASA grant NsG 09-015-023. 



1 9 Supported in part by a grant from the Alfred P. Sloane Foundation. 



20 Supported in part by NASA grant NsG 89-60 to Harvard University. 



21 Supported in part by NASA contract NSR 09-015-022. 



22 Supported by NASA contract NAS 5-1535. 



23 Supported in part by NSF grant GP-4318. 



24 Supported in part by USAF contract AF 19(628)-3877 with Harvard Uni- 

 versity. 



25 Supported in part by the National Science Foundation. 



26 Supported in part by NASA grant NsG 438 to Harvard University. 



27 Supported in part by USAF contract AF 19(628)-3322 with Harvard Uni- 

 versity. 



28 Supported in part by the Advance Research Laboratory of Douglas Aircraft 

 Company. 



29 Supported by NSF grants GP-3866 and GP-5791 to Harvard. 



30 With the cooperation of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, and CSIRO of 

 Australia; Cornell University. 



3i Supported by NASA grant NGR 09-015-025. 



32 Supported in part by Harvard University. 



33 Supported by a grant from the National Geographic Society. 



34 Supported in part by Boston University Department of Astronomy. 



35 Supported in part by the International Association of Geodesy. 





Science Information Exchange 



Monroe E. Freeman, Director 



i 



nnHE science information exchange performs a unique service for 

 -!■ the national research community by providing a reasonably com- 

 prehensive source of pre-publication information about research that 

 is planned or actually in progress. Under the leadership of the 

 Smithsonian Institution since 1953, this program has attracted the 

 participation and cooperation of research organizations throughout 

 the country. The number of participating agencies has risen steadily, 

 and now includes most of the Federal research programs, as well 

 as those of a substantial number of private foundations, universities, 

 industries, and state and city governments. Interest in the registration 

 of foreign research is growing, and new sources of information are 

 steadily added as SIE progresses towards its goal of a comprehensive, 

 and eventually complete, collection of currently active research 

 information. 



As the registration of the Federal research programs has come closer 

 to completion in 1966, more attention is being directed towards the 

 non-Government sources. Growth of the inventory is expected to 

 continue steadily, but at a slower rate in future years. 



Many potential users throughout the scientific community are as 

 yet unaware of the advantages of the role SIE plays in the free flow 

 of scientific information exchange in the pre-publication phase, so that 

 an equally important objective has been to encourage the use of SIE 

 by all members of the scientific community. A continuing effort has 



215 




216 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



been to make these services better known, and readily available to all 

 research scientists. Over 100 articles and news notes about SIE services 

 have appeared in scientific journals and other news media during the 

 year, many written or prepared by staff members. SIE staff members 

 have responded to invitations to speak at professional meetings, in- 

 formal conferences, symposia, and the annual meetings of such organi- 

 zations as the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, The Special 

 Libraries Association, the American Chemical Society, and others. 



Some 20,000 descriptive brochures were distributed to potential 

 users, information display booths were set up at a number of profes- 

 sional society meetings, and almost a thousand visitors came to the 

 Exchange during the year, many from overseas, to learn more about 

 the Exchange, and how its services could be adopted to their needs. 



Although the primary mission of SIE is to serve research scientists, 

 SIE has undertaken a number of investigations on the effectiveness 

 and efficiency of information systems. Studies have dealt with such 

 problems as the level of professional training and experience required 

 for effective information handling, new techniques for selective subject 

 indexing, the organization of information for research management, 

 a study on relevance and recall as the basic factors of effectiveness, 

 and detailed cost and productivity analyses as a prerequisite for 

 standards of efficiency and effectiveness. Six reports were presented 

 at the Congress of the International Federation of Documentation; 

 others have been published in various professional journals. A 

 thesaurus of 4,000 commonly used terms in the field of water resources 

 research was prepared for the Office of Water Resources Research. 

 This will be printed and distributed by the Department of Interior. 

 Other projects of increasing interest and activity at SIE are the mod- 

 ernization of computer files to inverted files and the conversion of 

 selected linear tape files to random-access disc storage. Another 

 project intended to increase efficiency and economy is the develop- 

 ment of a unique last-term system with generic relationships automati- 

 cally handled by computer programming. A project is being drawn 

 up to establish a remote interrogation real time system for handling 

 scientific subject matter on a cost-benefit basis comparable with estab- 

 lished methods. The extensive experience of SIE in information 

 handling, as well as its broad scope of subject interest, offers unusual 

 opportunities for research. The research program is considered 

 second only to the primary mission of service. 



For most of the year, SIE was intensively studied by a survey team 

 of the Battelle Memorial Institute. The survey of users and potential 

 users clearly indicated general satisfaction with the information services, 




SCIENCE INFORMATION EXCHANGE 217 



but pointed out the need for comprehensive coverage and the need 

 to make its services better known throughout the nation. 



While the collection of research records has steadily climbed to 

 over 100,000 records annually, the demand for services has increased 

 even more rapidly (approximately 25 percent over 1965). About 

 50,000 reports of all kinds were requested. These vary from simple 

 requests for a single document to the preparation of catalogs that 

 include thousands of records covering broad subject fields. SIE is 

 the national research cataloging center for water resources investi- 

 gations and has initiated, upon request from several federal sources, 

 the collection and organization of information about current studies 

 related to urban problems. Dr. Scott Keyes, University of Illinois, 

 will spend six months at SIE assisting in the organization of this 

 program. 



It is noteworthy that increasing interest in SIE has come from many 

 foreign countries. Besides the many visitors from overseas, there have 

 been increasing numbers of foreign research records voluntarily 

 offered for registration. Information services are provided to overseas 

 inquiries to the extent that they do not interfere with SIE's responsi- 

 bilities to the Federal research agencies and the American research 

 community. 



Publications 



The following papers by staff members of the Science Information 

 Exchange were published: 



Davis, W. F., Jr. The Science Information Exchange: Communica- 

 tion, storage and retrieval of scientific information. Poultry Science 

 (30 September 1965), vol. 44, no. 5. 



Fitzpatrick, William H. and Freeman, Monroe E. The Science 

 Information Exchange: The evolution of a unique information 

 storage retrieval system. Libri (fall 1965), vol. 15, no. 2. 



Foster, W. R. and Hersey, D. F. Indexer requirements for the 

 recognition of scientific content and context. 1965 Congress, 

 International Federation for Documentation (FID) Abstracts, 

 October 10-15, 1965. 



Freeman, Monroe E. Determining cost of information systems. 1965 

 Congress International Federation for Documentation (FID) 

 Abstracts, October 10-15, 1965. 



. A national inventory of research in progress. The Chemical 



Bulletin, October 1965. 



230-457—66 18 




218 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Freeman, Monroe E. The use of current scientific research informa- 

 tion for administrative purposes. 1965 Congress International Fed- 

 eration for Documentation (FID) Abstracts, October 10-15, 1965. 



. Water resources research and information retrieval. Pro- 

 ceedings of the 10th Annual Conference, November 22-23, 

 1965, Texas A&M. University. 



. The role of Science Information Exchange in the management 



of current research. The Chemist (December 1965), vol. 42, no. 12. 

 . The role of Science Information Exchange in the manage- 

 ment of current research — conclusions. The Chemist (February 

 1966), vol. 43, no. 2. 

 , Kohn, Edward H.; Foster, W. R.: Hersey, David F.; and 



Roth, Helga. Information problems related to urban research. 

 Conference Proceedings, 11 October 1965, sponsored by The 

 Advisory Commission on International Relations, the Department 

 of Housing and Urban Development, Science Information Ex- 

 change. 



Kreysa, F. J. and Foster, W. R. A retrieval profile for current 

 research information. 1965 Congress International Federation for 

 Documentation (FID) Abstracts, October 10-15, 1965. 



Long, B. L., and Hersey, D. V. A current awareness program for the 

 field of water resources. 1965 Congress International Federation 

 for Documentation (FID) Abstracts, October 10-15, 1965. 



Marron, H., and Snyderman, M. On the economics of computer 

 storage and retrieval. 1965 Congress International Federation 

 for Documentation (FID) Abstracts, October 10-15, 1965; American 

 Documentation (April 1966), vol. 17, no. 2. 



Summers, R. W., and Freeman, M. E. Development of a program- 

 matical technical index for the Office of Aerospace Research. 

 1965 Congress International Federation for Documentation (FID) 

 Abstracts, October 10-15, 1966. 




Smithsonian Activities 

 History and Art 





Museum of History and Technology 



Robert P. Multhauf, Director 



T tistorical museums are conventionally — and appropriately— com- 

 ■*■ ■*■ posed of collections of familiar objects worthy of preservation 

 either as exotic or archaic examples of the artifacts of daily life or as 

 examples of things the collection of which is traditional. The visitor 

 can hardly be surprised by the kind of things he finds in a museum; he 

 can and should, however, find the unexpected in the individual object. 

 This involves not only its quality, but innovations in display methods 

 and in novel exploitation of these objects through the research activ- 

 ities of the museum. The activities of the Museum of History and 

 Technology in utilizing collections which are otherwise conventional 

 are well illustrated in the following account of the recent accomplish- 

 ments and future plans of our division of numismatics. 



Numismatics at the Smithsonian 



Numismatics, a scholarly discipline at least since the 13th century, 

 often suffered in prestige because of its early methods, which tended to 

 be largely descriptive. It has emerged in recent times as an inter- 

 pretive science in which the application of established data became the 

 basis for broader research. 



The Smithsonian Institution has been conducting a widely traced 

 survey of numismatic cabinets and research groups within the frame- 

 work of the general reappraisal of numismatics as a science. A product 

 of this work is Elvira Clain-Stefanelli's review of past and present 

 trends in numismatic research published in her Numismatics — An Ancient 

 Science (1965). 



Through years of research in numismatic cabinets throughout the 

 world, the following general new trends have been noted: 



221 




222 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



1 . Concentrated activities in the research and publication of source 

 material: catalogs of coins of certain periods accompanied sometimes 

 by introductory studies, such as those conducted by the British Museum, 

 and numismatic cabinets in Copenhagen, Paris, Glasgow, Cambridge, 

 Oxford, New York, and Boston. 



2. Activities devoted to the registration, publication and some- 

 times interpretation of hoard finds, such as has been done in Stockholm, 

 Hamburg, Paris, Vienna, Munich, Prague, Sofia, Bucharest, and 

 Leningrad. 



3. The publication of monographs on subjects which range the 

 Orient and Occident from ancient to modern coins, and from historical 

 medals to decorations, such as has been done in New York, Leningrad, 

 Vienna, Prague, Tel Aviv, and elsewhere. 



The Smithsonian's numismatists are participating in this compre- 

 hensive endeavor through a numismatic survey of Israel, begun in 

 1 966, with particular reference to enlarging knowledge of the history 

 of Israel's ancient money economy. This entails a gradual inventory of 

 collections, drawing on materials found on or near ancient sites. 

 Scatter finds and hoards are both of great significance, and local 

 collections often provide excellent cross-sections of circulating media 

 from the areas where they were assembled. A goal of this survey is 

 to produce fully illustrated catalogs of collections which would make 

 available to students material otherwise practically inaccessible for 

 research, and would at the same time contribute to knowledge of 

 monetary circulation patterns. 



The purpose of the division of numismatics at the Smithsonian 

 Institution is to accomplish a double-fold mission: to try to bring the 

 great wealth of historic and artistic elements of numismatics to the 

 attention of the general public, and to serve the advancement of the 

 discipline through a well-planned activity of research and publications. 



The search into the history of all forms of money — attempting to 

 explain their origin, evolution, appearance, intrinsic qualities, and 

 relation to economics, and their social and cultural history — is the 

 real scope of numismatics as a scientific and historical discipline. 

 This viewpoint has been taken by Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli in his 

 forthcoming history of the national numismatic collections. 



When the modern researcher examines the economic function of 

 money, many new factors — such as cross-cultural valuation practices 

 and distributive processes — enter his field of vision. Accordingly, 

 numismatics has had to broaden its scope from that of a study restricted 

 to metallic and paper currency to the science of all forms of exchange — 

 including primitive media, money substitutes, and documents of value. 

 Accordingly, the exhibit of numismatics in the Smithsonian Institution 




Renaissance coin collector holding Sestertius of Nero (A.D. .54-68), by Hans 

 Memling (1430-1494), photo courtesy Musee Royal, Antwerp. Below: 

 New hall of numismatics. 




RISE OF MODERN AMERICA, 1873-1900 



o o a 



Em m$ fi-i ^f ; -^ 



"'L S9 



&«fl« 



@< 



y ^) Life . S 



|te' ; vrvS 



0® ..©.. 



•* Ci 



Above: Typical display in new hall of numismatics, tracing history of money 

 in the United States. Below: X-ray diffraction patterns of two coins: A 

 struck silver stater (left), 6th century B.C., of Aegina (Greece) and a modern 

 cast imitation, also silver, of the same coin. Clearly defined lines of right- 

 hand pattern indicate the relatively undistorted crystalline structure of a metal 

 casting; diffuse and broadened lines of the left indicate the distorted crystal- 

 line lattice of a cold-worked metal. Area represented is approximately 

 0.5 mm. in diameter, depth of X-ray penetration is on the order of 0.1 mm. 




MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY INTRODUCTION 223 



arranges displays of coins, tokens, and paper currencies in their his- 

 torical and cultural context, rather than by the conventional catalog 

 classification. The exhibits not only show the evolution of money 

 by means of characteristic examples selected from crossroads of history, 

 they also convey the spirit of various periods through the use of 

 illustrations, background material, and reproductions of typical 

 artifacts. 



The history of art also offers a close and pertinent relationship with 

 the field of numismatics; indeed, aesthetic qualities of coins have 

 probably been until recently a most powerful inducement to collecting. 

 Elvira Clain-Stefanelli's Italian Coin Engravers Since 1800 (1965) — her 

 most recent contribution to the elucidation of this field — is innovative 

 in the study of the work of these Italian artists. 



To the trained eye of the archeologist, coins may reveal aspects of 

 civilizations which have disappeared and left few or no records. In 

 many cases c fins can help to date ancient monuments, the composition 

 of coin hoards may serve as circumstantial evidence in tracing migra- 

 tions, army encampments, trade routes, or tides of colonization and 

 national expansion. 



An example of pure research directed toward the specialist is X-ray 

 diffraction analysis in numismatics to determine the crystal structure 

 and spatial arrangement of atoms in the crystalline lattice of coins. 

 This non-destructive method reveals significant information about coin 

 manufacturing — whether struck or cast, and if struck, whether hot or 

 cold struck. Thus we gain a better knowledge concerning coining 

 methods of the past and in this way it is frequently possible also to 

 distinguish between genuine and counterfeit coins. 



Future plans of our division of numismatics call for the exploitation 

 of all these avenues for the benefit of the National collections. The 

 cooperation of all pertinent departments and museums of the Smith- 

 sonian Institution will be sought in the accomplishment of this purpose. 



Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli, Curator 

 Elvira Clain-Stefanelli, Associate Curator 

 Division of Numismatics 




Research and Publication 

 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 



With the appointment of Robert P. Multhauf to the Directorship of 

 the Museum of History and Technology, Walter F. Cannon took over 

 as chairman of the department on May 31, 1966. Cannon is also editor 

 of The Smithsonian Journal of History, the first issue of which was pub- 

 lished in the spring of 1966. To fill the vacancy in the curatorship of 

 tools caused by the promotion of Silvio A. Bedini to Assistant Director 

 last year, Monte A. Calvert joined the staff this year. Calvert was 

 formerly the curator of the Archives of Industrial Society at the Univer- 

 sity of Pittsburgh, and has a book-length study, The Professionalization 

 of the American Mechanical Engineer, 1830-1910, accepted for publication 

 by The Johns Hopkins Press. 



Melvin H. Jackson, formerly associate curator in the division of naval 

 history, joined the department in April as associate curator in the sec- 

 tion of marine transportation. Jackson is continuing his researches in 

 oceanic history and affairs. 



The new cooperative graduate-teaching program with the University 

 of Pennsylvania was initiated in January when Cannon went on leave 

 to become the first Smithsonian visiting professor in the University's 

 Department of the History and Philosophy of Science. He taught an 

 advanced graduate course on "Physical Science from Young to Planck." 

 Several students came to Washington to consult with our staff; Uta C. 

 Merzbach and Calvert went to Philadelphia for individual class sessions 

 and Ph.D. qualifying examinations. Standards for the M.A. and Ph.D. 

 degrees were mutually agreed upon, and plans were made for next 

 year, when Merzbach in the fall semester and Calvert in the spring 

 will be visiting professors in Philadelphia. 



Two curators were honored by professional bodies for their scholar- 

 ship. In April Sami K. Hamarneh was the recipient of the Edward 

 Kremers award for distinguished pharmaco-historical writing of the 

 American Institute of the History of Pharmacy. He was cited at its 

 25th-anniversary symposium "for his meticulous scholarship and im- 

 portant revisionary interpretations concerning the history of pharmacy 

 in Islamic culture." He has also been elected secretary of the section 

 on historical pharmacy, and a member of the committee on awards of 



224 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 225 



the Institute. Multhauf's article, "Sal Ammoniac: A Case History in 

 Industrialization," published in Technology and Culture, won the Usher 

 prize of the Society for the History of Technology. 



John H. White's book length monograph, Cincinnati Locomotive 

 Builders 1845-1868, was published as a Museum bulletin. Three other 

 books completed by the staff are in process of publication: Howard I. 

 Chapelle, Search for Speed Under Sail in North America, 1700-1855; John H. 

 White, Jr., Representative American Locomotives Before 1880; Bernard S. 

 Finn, Source Book on Thermoelectricity. 



Silvio A. Bedini completely revised and substantially enlarged 

 his Early American Scientific Instruments and Their Makers, now out of 

 print, and will republish it as Scientific Instruments in 18th-Century 

 America, part two of a 3-volume work; his research is substantially 

 advanced on the other parts — Colonial American Scientific Artifacts and 

 19th-century American Instrument Makers and Dealers. His monograph 

 on the 17th-century Italian astronomer de Dondi, "Mechanical 

 Universe," is to be published by the American Philosophical Society 

 in the fall; and his book-length history of planetaria is in progress. 



Robert M. Vogel completed a detailed industrial-archeological 

 survey of the G. P. Bradway Machine Works of West Stafford, 

 Connecticut, in cooperation with the Historic American Buildings 

 Survey of the U.S. Department of the Interior. Under a Smithsonian 

 research grant, Vogel obtained complete drawings, photographs, 

 interviews, and written accounts of this small water-turbine factory, 

 most of the machinery of which is largely unchanged since it was in- 

 stalled in 1890. The results give an unusually accurate view of the 

 equipment and operational techniques of a specialized machine works 

 of the period. Copies of the survey report have been deposited in 

 the division's archival collections and in the HABS collection at the 

 Library of Congress; a scholarly article describing the methods of the 

 survey and its principal results is being prepared. Vogel also took 

 part in a project to ensure the permanent preservation of a historical 

 Bollman- truss bridge at Savage, Maryland, the last surviving example 

 of the first system of iron trussing used by an American railroad, and he 

 continued his cooperative work with the American Society of Civil 

 Engineers on the location and preservation of historic sites and 

 documents. 



Edwin A. Battison continued to supervise the translation of Russian 

 books through the National Science Foundation-Smithsonian 

 Institution cooperative program. The third of the series is V. V. 

 Danielevskii, Nartotfs Theatrum Machinarum. The books have a tech- 

 nical introduction by Battison. He also continued preparation of an 

 edition of Jacques Besson's Theatrum Instrumentorum et Machinarum. 




226 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



Battison's investigation of the origin of the milling machine in America 

 produced an article, "Eli Whitney and the Milling Machine," to be 

 published in the second issue of The Smithsonian Journal of History. 

 He continued to work with the group hoping to preserve as a museum 

 the Robbins & Lawrence armory at Windsor, Vermont. 



Monte A. Calvert completed the first draft of a book on American 

 mechanical technology at world fairs, 1851-1876; and began a study 

 of the American municipal engineer. 



Bernard S. Finn continued his re-creation of the early history of 

 the telephone through experiments with primitive telephone apparatus, 

 in an attempt to understand Alexander Graham Bell's problems as 

 he performed his experiments in the 1870s. The first results were 

 given in a paper to the Society for the History of Technology at its 

 annual meeting in December, and will be published in the third issue 

 of The Smithsonian Journal of History. At the Eleventh International 

 Congress of the History of Science, in Warsaw, Finn gave a paper on 

 electron theories in the 19th century. He continued to serve as 

 managing editor of Isis, the journal of the History of Science Society. 



Howard I. Chapelle in October resumed his studies of the admiralty 

 collection of draughts at the National Maritime Museum, London, then 

 attended the World Fishing Boat Congress in Goteborg, Sweden. He 

 also studied marine collections in Museums there and in Bergen, Oslo, 

 Copenhagen, and Barcelona. He brought near to conclusion his search 

 in the Public Records office, London, on 17th-, 18th-, and early- 19th- 

 century American ship building. 



White's article on the use of locomotive advertising lithographs as 

 detailed technical evidence, "Locomotives on Stone," was published in 

 the first issue of The Smithsonian Journal of History, with four of the litho- 

 graphs reproduced in full color. On a field trip to Copiapo, Chile, he 

 studied and sketched a Norris locomotive of 1850; work that provided 

 the Museum with a set of engineering drawings of this unique American 

 locomotive. 



Uta C. Merzbach continued her research on Liebnitz, delivering a 

 paper on "Leibniz's Mathematical Contributions in the Context of his 

 Time" at the Leibniz symposium held at Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute 

 in spring 1966, and one on "The Interrelationship of Mathematics and 

 Geographical Discovery" at the annual meeting of the Society for the 

 History of Discoveries at the University of Indiana. 



Deborah J. Warner published in the American Scientist a detailed study 

 of the work of George Willis Ritchey, the American astronomer re- 

 sponsible for the development of the large photographic reflecting tele- 

 scope, culminating in the 100-inch reflector on Mount Wilson. 




Hall of physical sciences: Diorama showing Andrew Ellicott (right) and one 

 of his assistants, Benjamin Banneker, taking a break from their work of 

 surveying the boundary of the District of Columbia in 1791. They are 

 shown on the Virginia bluffs overlooking the Potomac River near Litde 

 Falls with some of the instruments that they actually used. (In 1 792, when 

 Major Pierre L'Enfant— originally appointed planner of the City of Washing- 

 ton — was discharged after a quarrel with the commissioners for the city, 

 Ellicott completed the job.) 




Hall of physical sciences: Instruments used to lay out the Nation's Capital 

 and for other precise surveying in the late 18th century. Some of these were 

 used by Andrew Ellicott. On the right is the 6-foot zenith sector built by 

 David Rittenhouse of Philadelphia, with additions by Ellicott. It was the 

 most accurate scientific instrument built in this country in the 18th century. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ARTS AND MANUFACTURES 227 



ARTS ANDiMANUFAGTURES 



Curator John T. Schlebecker has in progress a scientific and technical 

 history of American agriculture. With the assistance of a summer in- 

 tern, this project should be accelerated in the coming year. His long- 

 term study of American farm life in its socioeconomic aspects, begun in 

 1964, is also in progress, with publication not expected before 1969. 

 Schlebecker is collaborating with Homer Socolofsky of Kansas State 

 University in the preparation of a history of Nebraska agriculture in 

 anticipation of the centennial of that state in 1967. 



Schlebecker and the department chairman collaborated with Wayne 

 Rasmussen, historian of the Department of Agriculture, and an ad hoc 

 committee of the Departments of Agriculture and Interior to examine 

 a proposal for a series of "Living Historical Farms." Suggested by 

 Marion Clawson of Resources for the Future, Inc., these farms would 

 be operated under conditions and with the crops typical of various 

 time periods in the growth of American agriculture. A proposal for 

 financing the detailed preliminary study, prepared by the Museum of 

 History and Technology representatives, is now before the Secretaries 

 of Agriculture and Interior. It is expected that the division will 

 continue to work with the committee in an advisory capacity. 



Museum technician Thomas Wessel, under the direction of the cura- 

 tor, is working on a history of the shelterbelts of the Great Plains, 

 1874-1967. 



In the division of ceramics and glass, compilation of the catalog of 

 the Hans Syz collection continued, involving research by curators 

 Paul V. Gardner and J. Jefferson Miller II in some fifteen private and 

 museum collections and correspondence with many European col- 

 lectors and museums. Dr. Hans Syz, donor of the collection, spent 

 several days on this project each month at the Smithsonian and addi- 

 tional time in Europe and Westport, Connecticut. 



Gardner's biography of Frederick Carder is scheduled for comple- 

 tion in fall 1966. During the year he completed a definitive compila- 

 tion of Steuben designs, and continued work on a catalog of the 

 International Congress on Glass Exhibit, 1962, and a Museum hand- 

 book on millifiori glass at the Smithsonian Institution. 



Noteworthy among the six lectures given during the year by Gardner 

 were "The Hans Syz Collection of 18th Century European Porcelain 

 at the Smithsonian Institution," at the Antiquarian Society of The 

 Art Institute of Chicago, November 23, 1965; and "Eighteen-Century 

 Chinese Export Porcelain," at the National Society of Arts and 

 Letters, Washington, D.C., March 1, 1966. 




228 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



In addition to his work on the catalog on the Hanz Syz collection 

 associate curator J. Jefferson Miller began studies of ceramic artifacts 

 recovered in archaeological excavations at Alexandria, Virginia, and 

 Fort Michilimackinac, Michigan. His eight lectures during the year 

 included one on "English Porcelain of the 18th Century," at the 

 Washington Antique Show, January 1966. In September 1965 

 Miller chaired a 3-day session on ceramics at the Pennsylvania Histori- 

 cal and Museum Commission annual Americana Forum at Penns- 

 bury Manor. He will conduct the ceramic seminar again in October 

 1966. In May 1966, Miller was elected a Trustee of the Wedgwood 

 International Seminar. 



Curator Jacob Kainen completed a study of the etchings of Antonio 

 Canal, called Canaletto (1697-1768). Now in press, the study will 

 include illustrations of all of Canaletto's etchings. Kainen also con- 

 tinued work on his study of the prints of Hendrick Goltzius, contributed 

 several articles to the New Catholic Encyclopedia, and served on the ed- 

 itorial board of The Smithsonian Journal of History. 



Associate curator Peter Morse published a paper on Rembrandt's 

 etching technique, using as an example an etching from the Smith- 

 sonian's graphic arts collection. He began research for a catalogue 

 raisonne of the prints of John Sloan. 



Kainen served as panelist for a symposium, "Originality in Prints," 

 held February 15, 1966; and as judge for the Scholastic Art Awards 

 Competition, the Winston-Salem Gallery of Fine Arts Annual Show, 

 and the All- Army Photographic Exhibition. He lectured to the 

 B'nai B'rith Youth Organization on contemporary Israeli prints and 

 to the Washington Print Club on contemporary Japanese prints; 

 and he presented a series of lectures on modern industrial printing 

 to a group of F.B.I, document inspectors, to help in determining fraud 

 and forgery. In addition, he had an exhibition of his own paintings 

 at the Roko Gallery in New York in March 1966. Kainen and Morse 

 visited New York in October 1965 to study modern printmaking 

 techniques and to obtain new prints for exhibition. Morse was a 

 juror for an art exhibition sponsored by the Internal Revenue Service 

 and served throughout the year as first editor of the Washington 

 Print Club Newsletter. 



Associate curator Eugene Ostroff was awarded a 3-year research 

 grant to continue his work, started last year, on the preservation and 

 restoration of photographs, and he prepared interim reports for 

 publication. 



In the Smithsonian collection Ostroff uncovered the earliest extant 

 example of W. H. Fox Talbot's experiments with light-sensitive ma- 

 terials, a picture made in 1835 that predates his first photographic 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ARTS AND MANUFACTURES 229 



negative invented in 1839. The example consists of a paper print 

 made from an artifically created negative. Talbot coated a sheet of 

 glass with a darkened varnish through which he scribed lines. Paper 

 coated with a light-sensitive solution was placed in contact with this 

 negative and exposed to light. In cooperation with Kodak Research 

 Laboratories, Rochester, New York, Ostroff examined the faded print 

 with self-emission and low- voltage X-ray photography, direct infrared 

 and ultra-violet photography, infrared luminescence photography, and 

 photographic contrast enhancement. These tests revealed the written 

 message "June 20th 1835, written with a pencil of tin, Lacock Abbey, 

 Wilts." and the alphabet from A-Z. 



In cooperation with Kodak Research Laboratories, chemical analyses 

 were also conducted on the early Fox Talbot experimental material 

 uncovered by Ostroff during his 1965 European field trip. The results 

 are being analyzed and the findings are being prepared for publication. 



Ostroff visited paper mills which manufacture photographic bases to 

 survey quality-control techniques. Laboratory test procedures were 

 established for investigating photographic image fading and the appro- 

 priate investigations were started. 



Museum technician David Haberstich assisted Ostroff in his re- 

 search related to the preservation and restoration of photographs. 

 Applying optical restoration procedures wherever necessary, Haber- 

 stich photocopied a large group of important early photographic 

 experiments by Fox Talbot and he assisted in the regulating and 

 standardization of new laboratory research equipment. 



Curator Grace R. Cooper continued her research on the spinning 

 wheel in America in the 1 7th through 1 9th centuries. She has 

 completed an initial survey of private and public collections in 29 

 states. Completion of this project is scheduled for the coming year. 

 As a senior technical editor for Encyclopaedia Britannica, Mrs. Cooper 

 reviewed a number of new textile articles for technical content, and 

 she outlined and recommended the reorganization of several existing 

 articles. 



Associate curator Rita J. Adrosko continued her research on the 

 use of natural dyes in 18th- and 19th-century American textiles. 

 The results will be included in an I COM report on "Dyestuffs Used 

 in the Past for Dyeing of Textile Materials in America." Her in- 

 vestigations of Jacquard-woven silk pictures and Jacquard imitation 

 tapestries continued. She also began research on 19th-century French 

 shawls; extensive information on this subject was gathered during 

 October and November 1965 when she visited various textile centers 

 in France and also attended the biannual meeting and technical 



230-457— 6G 19 




230 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



sessions of the Centre International d' Etudes des Textiles Anciens, 

 October 14-26. 



Museum specialist Doris Bowman continued her study of early 

 machine-made nets. Additional examples were located and identified. 

 A monograph of this research is in preparation. 



Acting curator Philip W. Bishop presented a paper at the annual 

 meeting of the Society for the History of Technology on the growth of 

 the American iron industry in relation to the development of the 

 American economy through 1865. Using the techniques employed in 

 the study of developing economies as evolved in recent years, the paper, 

 which is being expanded for publication, involves a new approach to 

 the technological history of the first half of the 19th century in America. 

 Considerable research has been done in connection with the introduc- 

 tion of rolled iron and steel beams, arising out of a paper presented in 

 preliminary form by Robert A. Jewett of the School of Engineering 

 of the University of Illinois. Bishop also continued research into the 

 origins of drilling methods employed in the United States. This in- 

 volved collaboration with J. Edward Brandy, who is working on a 

 definitive history of drilling for the American Petroleum Institute. 



The coal research activities of associate curator John N. Hoffman were 

 concentrated on the development of a suitable script for the hall of 

 coal. He has been working closely with representatives of the coal 

 industry. The history of the mechanization of the bituminous coal 

 industry and the relation of the development of American anthracite 

 resources to the evolution of transportation methods in the early 19th 

 century were studied, and a number of contemporary archives were 

 discovered. 



All members of the department gave lectures in the graduate courses 

 in American civilization organized by the department of American 

 studies in collaboration with The George Washington University. 



The department has been host to three Smithsonian Fellows: Eliza- 

 beth Harris of the University of Reading, England, who studied the 

 development of early photomechanical printing methods, using the 

 Museum's large collection in this field; James H. Brewer of North Caro- 

 lina State University, who studied the contribution of the Negro artisan 

 to the Confederate war effort; and Henry J. Kauffman of Millersville 

 State College, Pennsylvania, who is preparing a history of technology 

 for the use of the undergraduate. All have profited from access to the 

 collections and the curators of the Museum, and have amply demon- 

 strated the value of the fellowship program to the scholar and his host. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION CIVIL HISTORY 231 



CIVIL HISTORY 



The increasing interest in historic archeology as a scientific tool in the 

 study of history was reflected in a 3-day seminar on the role of historic 

 archeology, of which C. Malcolm Watkins, curator of cultural history, 

 was chairman. Participants, who ranged from classical archeologists 

 and anthropologists to historians and curators, were drawn from univer- 

 sities and museums extending from Exeter, England, to San Francisco. 



An application of the role of the historic archeologist was demon- 

 strated as a result of a request by the Urban Renewal Agency of 

 Alexandria, Virginia, for assistance in salvage archeology in the Gadsby 

 Urban Renewal area of downtown Alexandria. Archeological aid 

 Richard J. Muzzrole, of the division of cultural history, was assigned 

 to this task. He worked under dramatically adverse conditions, be- 

 tween the motions of bulldozers and piledrivers, to salvage rich material 

 evidence of urban life in a Federal-period town. Many hundreds of 

 artifacts recovered from wells and privy pits that had been filled be- 

 tween 1790 and 1835 provided a detailed picture of the ceramics, 

 glass, and other objects that belonged to merchants, shop-owners, and 

 inn-keepers of the time. This type of cooperation between the city of 

 Alexandria and the Smithsonian Institution could well be a model for 

 collaboration between urban renewal administrators and archeologists 

 wherever historic areas are about to be disturbed and opportunity can 

 be seized to secure knowledge and preserve evidence of the historic past. 

 In furtherance of the effort to develop research in the field of political 

 campaigning, associate curator Keith E. Melder, in charge of the 

 division of political history, organized a conference June 2-3, 1966, on 

 needs and opportunities in the study of political campaigning. A 

 panel of historians, political scientists, and representatives of the com- 

 munications media discussed the scholarly neglect of campaigning, the 

 20th-century revolution in campaigning, and campaign collections and 

 resources for their study. 



Chairman Richard H. Howland, devoting a considerable part of his 

 time to special assignments, continued to serve as chairman of the 

 managing committee of the American School of Classical Studies, at 

 Athens. He made three brief trips to the School, in October, January, 

 and June, in connection with the initiation of a major excavation 

 campaign in the ancient Agora of the city of Athens. He continued as 

 a member of the 12-man U.S. National Committee of ICOMOS (In- 

 ternational Council of Monuments and Sites), representing this com- 

 mittee and the United States at the annual meeting in Vienna of IBI 

 (Internazionales Burgen Institut), and he read a paper at the joint 

 meetings of IBI and the Oesterreichische Burgenverein. 




232 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



Curator V. Clain-Stefanelli, of the division of numismatics, par- 

 ticipated in Treasury Department hearings concerning the importation 

 of certain gold coins, and continued his co-operation with the Treasury 

 Department's Office of Domestic Gold and Silver Operations, in con- 

 nection with establishing the status of gold coins and medals. He is 

 engaged in developing practical procedures regarding the authenti- 

 cation of gold bars. He also conducted a survey of numismatic 

 museums in Istanbul, Athens, Sofia, Bucharest, Moscow, and 

 Leningrad, part of a long-range project that also includes a numismatic 

 survey of Israel. 



Associate curator Elvira Clain-Stefanelli addressed the Congress 

 of the International Federation of the Medal in Athens, Greece, as 

 United States delegate. For this occasion she prepared a special 

 exhibit of contemporary United States medals. Mrs. Clain-Stefanelli 

 was re-elected a member of the Central Bureau of the International 

 Congress of the Medal. 



John Fesperman, newly appointed to supervise performance activ- 

 ities in the division of musical instruments, arranged for concerts by 

 invited musicians who used the Smithsonian's 18th-century German 

 clavichord, the Barak Norman gamba, and the Shudi and Dulcken 

 harpsichords. Museum specialist Scott Odell spent several days in 

 southwestern Virginia searching for and interviewing traditional 

 dulcimer players. Several were found and tape recordings made of 

 their playing in preparation for a record documenting this neglected 

 and fast-disappearing folk tradition. 



Extensive progress on the development of the iconographic file of 

 illustrations of musical subjects represented in art was made by 

 museum technician Helen Hollis. This archive, now numbering about 

 850 items will provide the Smithsonian with a valuable source of 

 research information about the history of the construction and use 

 of musical instruments. 



Professor George E. Hargest of Clark University completed a survey 

 and historical interpretation of 237 pieces of transatlantic mail in the 

 collection of the division of philately and postal history. The work 

 resulted in an important record of mail carried before the reform -and 

 standardization of international postal rates under conventions of the 

 Universal Postal Union, effective in 1875. Professor Hargest's 

 manuscript not only documents the holdings of the division with respect 

 to this type of mail, but summarizes and interprets the various 19th- 

 century postal treaties between the United States and foreign countries. 



Associate curator Carl H. Scheele, in charge of the division of 

 philately and postal history, completed a manuscript dealing with the 

 general field of postal history, surveying postal services abroad from 




Hall of medals and decorations: 

 American eagle sculptured 

 in wrought iron marks en- 

 trance to section of the hall. 

 Below: Portion of series of 

 halls illustrating U.S. armed 

 forces history through the 

 Civil War, opened this year 

 along with hall of ordnance. 




Hall of ordnance: Two of a series of exhibits illustrating the development of 

 small arms. 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ARMED FORCES HISTORY 233 



ancient times to the 19th century, and American postal services from 

 Colonial times to the present. 



ARMED FORCES HISTORY 



Underwater exploration and research into its methods and pro- 

 cedures continued as the major project of chairman Mendel L. 

 Peterson. 



An expedition to Bermuda during July and August explored wreck 

 sites dating from the late 16th through the 19th centuries. A major 

 accomplishment was the removal of a midship section of a large, as 

 yet unidentified, Spanish ship believed to date from the late 16th 

 century. This section is being preserved and will form an important 

 element in a reconstructed site in the hall of underwater exploration. 

 The section was removed by hand sawing with a crosscut saw and 

 involved a considerable amount of physical exertion. The inner 

 planking, floor timbers, futtocks, and sheathing of the ship were all 

 carefully numbered as they were removed and will be reassembled 

 exactly as found. In sectioning the ship a gunport cover was found, 

 a discovery that gave additional information on the above-deck ap- 

 pearance of the vessel. Other areas under the remaining timber 

 of the ship remain to be explored and are expected to yield additional 

 artifacts which may be useful in establishing the exact identity of 

 the ship. 



Another site, potentially of importance to the history of the glass 

 trade, was a site with an associated date of 1783 which yielded a 

 large quantity of fragments of table glass. Over forty distinct forms 

 were recognized in the many hundreds of specimens recovered. This 

 cargo may have originated in England but a thorough search of the 

 Bermuda Archives failed to identify the site definitely. It is possible 

 that the cargo contains American as well as English glass and that 

 it was transshipped, a fact which would add to the difficulties of exact 

 identification. Even if not associated with a particular ship, however, 

 the collection is important since it represents a precisely dated cargo 

 which will be important in dating other table glass found in collections 

 ashore. 



Several other wreck sites which warrant further exploration included 

 the General Armstrong, a sailing vessel of the Civil War period, the Minnie 

 Brassier, a Confederate blockade runner, and an unidentified Spanish 

 ship of the late 17th or early 18th centuries. 



Museum specialist Alan B. Albright continued an investigation into 

 the preservation of water-logged wood with polyethylene glycol, the 




234 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



use of ultrasonics in the cleaning of encrusted objects, and the vacuum 

 impregnation of wet organic materials. 



The addition of a museum technician to the staff gives additional 

 stimulus to the program for the preservation of materials recovered 

 from underwater sites. Thaddeus S. Moore, who joined the staff in 

 January 1966, is restoring several significant ceramic vessels dating 

 from the 16th through the early 19th centuries. Much of the work of 

 the laboratory now concerns itself with the preservation of the large 

 section of ships' timber removed from the late 16th-century wreck 

 site in Bermuda. 



Chairman Peterson completed two papers relating to ordnance re- 

 covered from underwater sites: "Ordnance Materials Recovered From 

 a Late Sixteenth Century Shipwreck Site" and "Wired Ball for Small 

 Arms 1594-1715." Both of these papers will appear in Military Col- 

 lector and Historian, Journal of the Company of Military Historians. He 

 delivered some thirty lectures on the underwater exploration program 

 during the year to professional and lay groups. 



Curator Edgar M. Howell and museum specialist Donald E. Kloster 

 accelerated work on a comprehensive, descriptive, critical, and docu- 

 mentary catalog of United States Army dress to include uniforms, 

 headgear, and footwear. The first volume of this project, covering the 

 subject of headgear through 1854, is complete and ready for editing. 

 Much of the research for the second volume, that on uniforms through 

 1854, is complete, and work is continuing. This research is being 

 performed in conjunction with a comprehensive recataloging and doc- 

 umenting of the uniform collections, a particularly significant project 

 in that these, comprising more than 1,200 American uniforms plus a 

 large number of foreign ones, are the most comprehensive in existence. 



Howell has greatly expanded his efforts to locate original graphic 

 material illustrative of the role of the United States Army in the opening 

 and development of the West, publishing a third monograph and 

 working on a fourth and fifth on the subject. This is a long-range and 

 continuing project. 



Kloster has completed most of the research on a monograph' on 

 Quartermaster General Montgomery C. Meigs' first attempt to publish 

 specifications for clothing and equipage in his efforts to establish and 

 maintain rigid standards for these types of materiel procured by the 

 Army. The monograph, which will be illustrated, will include here- 

 tofore unpublished specifications, with documentation, for the period 

 from the Civil War through 1872. 



Between June 1 and July 4, 1966, associate curator Craddock R. 

 Goins, Jr., participated in the Fourth International Congress of 

 Museums of Arms and Military History in Moscow, and examined 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION ARMED FORCES HISTORY 235 



weapons collections in Stockholm, Moscow, Leningrad, Vienna, 

 Paris, Brussels, and London. His studies were directed toward iden- 

 tifying and documenting European arms in the collections of the 

 Smithsonian Institution for publication in a catalog of the collections. 



Colonel B. R. Lewis, USA (Ret.), consultant to the division, com- 

 pleted his manuscript "Small Arms Ammunition Displayed at the 

 International Exposition, Philadelphia, 1876, Prepared by the 

 Frankford Arsenal." In addition to being an excellent catalog of 

 the display, which is now part of the Museum collections, Colonel 

 Lewis' manuscript is a valuable study of the development of small-arms 

 ammunition during the first three quarters of the 19th century. 



Curator Philip K. Lundeberg revised for publication in two forth- 

 coming issues of the Smithsonian Journal of History his study on the 

 impact of undersea warfare upon Allied strategy during World 

 War I. In this revision he examined more closely the technological, 

 diplomatic, and geographical factors that discouraged Great Britain 

 from undertaking the celebrated "Baltic Project," an amphibious 

 thrust through the Danish Straits against the Baltic coast of Germany. 



During the year Lundeberg conducted research at Philadelphia and 

 Washington on the Continental gondola Philadelphia, publishing thereon 

 a brief survey pamphlet entitled "The Continental Gunboat Philadel- 

 phia and the Northern Campaign of 1776," which includes an illustrated 

 account of the Battle of Valcour Island, as well as a description of the 

 raising and preservation of the Philadelphia. Final revisions and addi- 

 tions were made by Lundeberg to the American contribution to the 

 Bibliography of the Great Sea Routes sponsored by The International Com- 

 mission on Maritime History of UNESCO. A final report on this ma- 

 jor international bibliographic enterprise was presented by Dr. Lunde- 

 berg in November 1965 at the Annual Meeting of the Society for the 

 History of Discoveries held at the University of Indiana. Work con- 

 tinued on the catalog of United States warship models, and a special 

 study of the 44-gun British ship-of-the-line America (1749) was well 

 advanced by Merritt A. Edson, Jr., of Washington, D.C. 



During the year associate curator Melvin H. Jackson continued his 

 survey of cannon produced by Jan and Pieter Verbruggen between 

 1751-1782 as part of his study on fifty foundry drawings of Pieter 

 Verbruggen. In addition Jackson continued his research on the history 

 of the American privateer Prince of Neufchatel. Material secured from 

 British Admiralty archives, records of the Port of Brest, France, the 

 United States National Archives, and the records of the New York 

 Surrogate Court revealed much new information on the owners and 

 fighting career of this celebrated privateer of the War of 1812. 




236 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



During the year exhibits specialist Howard Hoffman prepared de- 

 tailed plans of the Continental gondola Philadelphia, including drawings 

 of her ordnance, anchors, and deck furniture, based on his detailed 

 survey of that historic vessel. In addition, Hoffman prepared detailed 

 plans for the gun carriage of a late- 18th-century carronade and a 

 privateer's deck section appropriate for its exhibition. 



In association with the Naval Historical Foundation, the division of 

 naval history continued a series of lectures on naval and maritime 

 history. On October 14, 1965, Rear Admiral John B. Heffernan, for- 

 mer Director of Naval History, Department of the Navy, lectured on 

 "The Union Blockade, 1861-1865," illuminating that critical maritime 

 aspect of the Civil War by distinguishing between the concept of an 

 effective and an efficient blockade. In addition, the division sponsored 

 an illustrated lecture on February 17, 1966, by the noted British mari- 

 time historian, Commander David W. Waters, on "Convoy in the Age 

 of Sail and Today." 



AMERICAN STUDIES 



Late in December 1965, a department of American studies was set 

 up in the Museum of History and Technology and Wilcomb E. Wash- 

 burn, formerly curator of the divison of political history, was appointed 

 its chairman. 



The principal function of the department is to carry on an American 

 Studies Program in cooperation with universities throughout the 

 country. An orientation seminar in the material culture of the United 

 States, designed to acquaint graduate students in the local universities 

 with the resources and with the scholars of the Museum, was offered 

 during the spring semester of 1966. George Washington University 

 was the only university administratively able to participate in the 1966 

 program, but the University of Maryland and other local universities 

 are scheduled to participate when the Seminar is given again in spring 

 1967. Reading courses with individual members of the staff of the 

 Museum and thesis direction are also available under the Program, 

 and the first doctoral candidate was accepted. He will work under 

 the joint supervision of Washburn and the chairman of the department 

 of history at the University of Delaware on the development of museum 

 education at the Smithsonian in the period of Spencer F. Baird and 

 G. Brown Goode. As knowledge of the program spread, inquiries 

 were received from department heads throughout the country, and 

 tentative arrangements for advanced research by other graduate stu- 

 dents were discussed. The program is expected to open up many 




RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION GROWTH OF THE U.S. 237 



unexploited areas of research in material culture to doctoral students 

 in American universities. 



A second responsibility of the department of American studies is 

 to plan a proposed Historical Studies Center, that will involve a 

 historic sources survey, a historic sites survey, and other programs 

 designed to make museum resources in the United States better 

 known and more effectively exploited. 



In August 1965 Washburn attended the International Congress 

 of the History of Science at Warsaw and at Cracow, Poland; and 

 in August-September 1965 the International Congress of Historical 

 Sciences at Vienna, Austria, where he represented the Society for 

 the History of Discoveries at the meetings of the International Com- 

 mission on Maritime History. He prepared papers for the annual 

 meeting of the American Indian Ethnohistoric Conference in Tucson, 

 Arizona, on "Philanthropy and the American Indian"; and for the 

 North American Fur Trade Conference, St. Paul, Minnesota, on 

 "Symbol, Utility, and Aesthetics in the Indian Fur Trade." In 

 November 1965 he presided at the annual meeting of the Society 

 for the History of Discoveries at the University of Indiana. 



Lectures were delivered by Washburn in March 1966 at the National 

 Bureau of Standards on "The Evolution of Government Science 

 Policy in the Nineteenth Century," with special reference to the 

 Smithsonian Institution; and in June 1966, at the Foreign Service 

 Institute, Department of State, on "Values in United States History." 



GROWTH OF THE UNITED STATES 



Curator Peter C. Welsh continued his work on the Harry T. Peters 

 lithography collection, the Van Alstyne folk art collection, and upon 

 various aspects of technological history, principally, the implements 

 of the handcrafts. The principal work completed this year has been 

 the manuscript, "Track and Road," a history of the American trotting 

 horse based upon the visual record preserved in the Peters lithography 

 collection. The principal publications by this curator have been 

 American Folk Art: The Art and Spirit of a People, published by the 

 Smithsonian Institution, and the article "The Metallic Woodworking 

 Plane" which appeared in Technology and Culture, January 1966. 



Assistant curator Anne Castrodale prepared the catalog entries 

 for about 150 objects from the Eleanor and Mabel Van Alstyne Folk 

 Art collection included in American Folk Art: The Art and Spirit of a 

 People, by Peter C. Welsh. She completed the editing of the journal 

 of William Wood Thackara, a volunteer from Philadelphia in the 




238 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



War of 1812, and continued her study of the life and work of the 

 18th-century Philadelphia cabinetmaker Daniel Trotter. 



Museum technician Robert R. Macdonald has been researching the 

 history of the Benjamin Franklin press, and also tanning in the United 

 States during the later half of the nineteenth century. He assisted 

 in the preparation of a proposed exhibition on the Victorian woman 

 and prepared the bibliography for it. 




Laboratory of about 1 790 in hall of chemistry. Nearby is an exhibit depicting 

 a chemistry laboratory of the 1890s. Below: 1890 American pharmacy in 

 hall of medical sciences. The fixtures were, until 1958, part of a drug store 

 located in southeast Washington, D.C. 




Starting late in spring 1966, lecture-demonstrations on the effect of nuclear 

 radiation on plants, animals, and foods were given by staff members of the 

 Oak Ridge Institute for Nuclear Studies, which sponsored the project. 

 The exhibit also illustrated the use of radioisotopes in medicine. 




The Collections 

 CARE AND CONSERVATION 



SPECIMENS ACCESSIONED, IDENTIFIED, AND 



FISCAL YEAR 1966 



Accessions 

 {transac- 

 tions) 

 1966 

 Departments {new) 



Science and 



Technology 191 



Arts and Man- 

 ufactures 225 



Civil History 675 



Armed Forces 

 History 1 14 



Total 1,205 



DISTRIBUTED— 



567 



1,311 150,289 



As halls become completed, more staff time can be devoted to rear- 

 rangement of reference collections and up-dating of catalogs and files. 

 This has begun in the division of electricity and in the growing archives 

 of mechanical and civil engineering. Unpacking and storage of the 

 very large James Arthur watch and clock collection is being carried out 

 so as to eliminate later rearranging and recataloging. 



In addition to the usual restoration work, we have a growing program 

 of returning objects to operational status, both for making up more 

 interesting displays and for facilitating research into the acutal utility 

 and accuracy of the objects. Thus a number of internal combustion 

 engines to be shown operating in the hall of heavy machinery were 

 restored under the direction of technician William K. Henson, and 

 the difficult task of restoring early television sets was undertaken by 

 technician Roy V. LaRoche. Operating exhibits interest the public 

 very much, but require much maintenance; thus many of the clocks in 

 the timekeeping hall have required cleaning, lubrication, and the 

 replacement of worn elements this year. 



A survey of the entire agriculture and forest products collection is in 

 progress to determine the need to eliminate redundant material, and 



239 




240 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



the collection of approximately 2,000 photographs on farm machinery 

 implements and processes is being organized and cataloged. 



Transfer of the reference collections of ceramics and glass to the 

 Museum of History and Technology was completed, and plans were 

 made to arrange, inventory, and index them. The move was greatly 

 expedited by the assistance of Museum Specialist Abraham Richards 

 and Technicians John Carter and Francis Gadson of the division of 

 manufactures and heavy industry. Twelve important pieces in the 

 Hans Syz collection were repaired during the year. 



Research fellow Elizabeth M. Harris and museum technician 

 James W. Norwood have undertaken a complete re-arrangement of the 

 important collection of photomechanical prints in the division of 

 graphic arts. Dr. Harris identified and documented numerous items 

 hitherto undescribed, and with the help of Norwood made much- 

 needed repairs on damaged specimens. Associate curator Eugene 

 Ostroff treated a small selection of the collection's most valuable photo- 

 graphs with the new technique, devised by him, for restoring faded 

 photographs though neutron irradiation. Museum specialist Elliott 

 Hawkins continued a long-range project of verifying equipment speci- 

 mens with catalog cards, and he is systematically arranging the 

 collection. 



The textiles laboratory completed the technical analysis and wet- 

 cleaning of 86 items. Especially challenging were three bagpipe covers 

 from the musical instrument collections, each of which had an outer 

 leather cover and a separate inner lining that had obsorbed the sugary 

 compound used to soften the leather of the bag. This compound was 

 successfully removed by museum technician Maureen Collins, who is 

 responsible for the cleaning work of the laboratory. 



Several large specimens, attempted for the first time, including a 

 large white embroidered counterpane, an embroidered shawl, and a 

 hand-woven blanket, all needed for the new textile exhibit hall. Care 

 in rinsing is of great importance in handling large items. A short, 

 illustrated paper on the "How to Wet-Clean Undyed Cotton and 

 Linen" submitted for publication by Miss Collins, covers the methods 

 judged best by the division after the cleaning of over 500 articles in the 

 laboratory during the past 4 years. 



The musical instruments reference collections and restoration labo- 

 ratory were provided with a constant and closely regulated relative 

 humidity of 50 ±2 percent. The improvement in stability of the speci- 

 mens, especially of the restored keyboard instruments, has been 

 noticeable. Robert Sheldon who joined the staff as a museum tech- 

 nician, is restoring to playing condition several wind instruments, 

 including an early 19th-century serpent. 




THE COLLECTIONS CARE AND CONSERVATION 241 



Work has begun on the complete documentation of every dress in the 

 First Ladies collection. A professional pattern maker is preparing a 

 pattern of each dress, making a muslin copy, and providing a set of 

 instructions for its construction, accompanied by a water color drawing 

 of the dress. 



A long-range project was started to arrange systematically the entire 

 study collection of coins, tokens, and medals in individual boxes of 

 adequate sizes placed on shallow metal trays. The trays are all inter- 

 changeable and are arranged in metal cabinets, each provided with 

 79 sliding slots for the individual trays. 



The restoration of numerous leather, paper, metal and wooden 

 specimens, completed in preparation for use in the growth of the 

 United States exhibits, was done in cooperation with the conservation- 

 analytical laboratory (see p. 52). 



Precautions against damage to specimens by all types of light were 

 taken throughout the entire armed forces history exhibit area with the 

 installation of filters, diffusers, and blackout curtains. 



In the division of military history, emphasis was placed on reorganizing 

 and cataloging collections in the new storage areas, and placing them 

 in new types of storage containers. Restoration of flags continued, 

 and research in this area was carried out in conjunction with the 

 division of textiles, with whose help considerable work also was done 

 on cleaning and restoring of some of the more fragile uniforms. 



Approximately a third of the weapons in the reference collections 

 were disassembled, cleaned, and treated for preservation by museum 

 aid Zeb Spencer. A commercial rust inhibitor, Formula 3-36, pre- 

 pared by the Corrosion Reaction Consultants, Dresher, Pennsylvania, 

 has been most effective in protecting metal objects from moisture and 

 toxicity. 



Consultant Colonel B. R. Lewis examined the small arms ammunition 

 collections and recommended a method of treating metallic coatings 

 to prevent corrosion and oxidation of lead. Experiments are being 

 made and the results will be published. Colonel Lewis also examined 

 and identified all the specimens of small-arms ammunition, made 

 recommendations for their arrangement in the reference collections, 

 and suggested sources for obtaining additional specimens needed. 



The division of naval history bent special efforts toward securing 

 stable temperature and humidity conditions in exhibition halls and 

 reference collection areas, with particular attention being given to the 

 Continental gondola Philadelphia. Through the skillful efforts of 

 conservator Charles Olin, a mutilated mid- 19th-century oil painting 

 of United States naval operations off Canton was completely restored 

 and made available for exhibition. All printed material in the P.V.H. 



230-457—66 20 




242 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



Weems Memorial Library was cataloged and a large number of manu- 

 scripts relating to the history of modern navigation were microfilmed 

 for use by scholars. 



GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 



SPECIMENS IN THE NATIONAL COLLECTIONS MAY 31, 1966 



Department of Science and Technology 103, 307 



Physical Sciences 4, 539 



Mechanical and Civil Engineering 12, 315 



Electricity 7, 452 



Transportation 42, 981 



Medical Sciences 36, 020 



Department of Arts and Manufactures 151, 572 



Textiles 35, 467 



Ceramics and Glass 17, 448 



Graphic Arts 52, 485 



Manufactures and Heavy Industries 35, 561 



Agriculture and Forest Products 10, 611 



Department of Civil History 10, 305, 667 



Political History 48, 693 



Cultural History 24, 260 



Philately and Postal History 10, 032, 967 



Numismatics 199, 747 



Department of Armed Forces History 54, 922 



Military History 41 , 969 



Naval History 12, 953 



Total 10, 615, 468 



SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 



As is usual, important accessions included both large scale collections 

 and individual items of outstanding interest. Examples of the former 

 were the acquisition of the Thomas Norrell railroad collection of some 

 12,000 prints, books, and negatives, the result of a lifetime of dis- 

 criminating collecting, and 119 linen and eggshell-paper drawings of 

 early locomotives and cars, donated by the Reading Company; an 

 example of the latter was the gift by Marion M. Emery of a delicate 

 racing sulky of about 1870. 



An item of considerable public interest was the first Atlas ground 

 guidance computer, Mod I, retired to us by the U.S. Air Force from 

 its duties at Cape Kennedy. The computer, however, has a long his- 

 tory, and we were fortunate to be able to obtain one of the early 

 attempts at a useful computing machine, that of de Lepine in 1 725, as 




THE COLLECTIONS CARE AND CONSERVATION 243 



well as the first practicable commercial calculating machine, the 1820 

 model of Charles X. Thomas. 



Not all instruments age so swiftly; we received from the Bureau of 

 Standards the Meggers infra-red spectroscope with which precision 

 spectroscopy in this country was initiated by Dr. Meggers in 1914. 

 The instrument, although in some ways outmoded, still holds the record 

 for long-wave measurements in the far infra-red. And a large 18th- 

 century copper still, marked "R. Bush, Bristol, 1787," was obtained 

 from the U.S. Department of Internal Revenue. 



The division of mechanical and civil engineering received a large 

 group of documents related to the career of William Rich Hutton 

 (1826-1901). It consists, apparently, of every piece of paper used by 

 Hutton in his work as assistant engineer on the Washington, D.C., 

 water supply system of 1857-1859 and as chief engineer of the C&O 

 Canal through the 1870s, of the steel arch bridge over the Harlem 

 River in New York, of the first Hudson River tunnel in 1888-1890, and 

 of many lesser projects. It may well be the most comprehensive doc- 

 umentation of the work of any single civil engineer of the latter 1 9th 

 century. From Brown University came a unique collection of models 

 connected with George Corliss. Other accessions include a number of 

 sundials; an important clock made by Whitehurst of Derby; and an 

 1876 Gleason bevel-gear planer, the first commercially successful bevel- 

 gear cutter, which will go on display in the hall of tools. 



The medical sciences collections received 40 Limoges apothecary 

 jars, a gift from Smith Kline & French Laboratories; and an 1896 

 syrup dispensing urn, donated by the Coca-Cola Co. Two 17th- 

 century Italian majolica drug jars, a 13th-century Persian glazed- 

 pottery mortar, and a 12th-century Persian pottery jar were purchased 

 through the Squibb fund. The dental collections of Dr. Charles H. 

 Land was donated by Columbia University. 



The division of electricity received four major donations: A 200- 

 kilowatt Alexanderson alternator, dating from 1921, marking the cul- 

 mination of the alternator method of producing radio waves; apparatus 

 used in the first commercial microwave communications system of 1945 

 between New York and Philadelphia; an alternating current generator 

 and a transformer of the mid- 1880s, donated by Sebastian de Ferranti, 

 grandson of the inventor, representing unique early design in alter- 

 nating current; and photomicrographs taken by Ladislaus Marton 

 with his first three electron microscopes. 



The marine transportation section received from the Socony Oil Co., 

 a model of a Mobil-Socony tanker and from the Luckenbach Lines a 

 sectionalized model, on %-inch scale, of a large freight steamer. 




244 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



ARTS AND MANUFACTURES 



A model of a Swedish gang mill was acquired from the Soderhamn 

 Machine Manufacturing Company of Talladega, Alabama. Also 

 acquired were a partially framed model of the ship Ocean Monarch, 

 constructed by Boucher Lewis Precision Models, Inc., New York; 

 and an operating model of a dry kiln made by the Moore Dry Kiln 

 Company of Jacksonville, Florida. All these models will be in- 

 corporated in forest products hall. 



Raymond Stout of Washington, D. C, presented a 1901 Hubei 

 model steam tractor. An excellent collection of barbed wire was 

 lonated by Frank Horsfall, Department of Horticulture, Virginia 

 Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, Virginia. K. E. Clark of Los 

 Angeles, California, gave a cast iron seat to complete the one-horse, 

 front-cut mowing machine of 1880 now in the farm machinery hall. 



Many of the 291 pieces of ceramics and glass accessioned during 

 the year came from donors who over the years have demonstrated a 

 continued interest in building a strong and diverse collection. Mrs. 

 Florence E. Bushee gave 42 rare 19th century paperweights. Mrs. 

 William A. Sutherland gave 14 pieces of 18th-century English porcelain, 

 including a very rare pair of Bow sauceboats and a fine pair of Bow 

 figures. Mr. and Mrs. George W. Ware presented 1 1 pieces of antique 

 German glass; several were types previously unrepresented in the 

 collections. Mr. and Mrs. L. Wagner gave 1 1 pieces of early Steuben 

 glass; a welcome addition to the division's strong collection of Steuben 

 glass. And Dr. Hans Syz gave 15 pieces of 18th-century German and 

 English porcelain; included among these were an important Meissen 

 tureen and an extremely fine Derby sweetmeat stand. 



Four pieces of 19th-century American Tucker porcelain were 

 purchased through the Joanne Toor Cummings Fund. Mr. and 

 Mrs. Mayer Greenberg established a fund from which was purchased 

 7 pieces of contemporary pottery from the studio of Otto and Gertrud 

 Natzler. The A. D. Alpine Company presented an electric kiln 

 which will be used in live demonstrations of the potter's art. 



The significant acquisition of the division of graphic arts was the 

 Harris Model S4L offset press, serial no. 101, now on display. Built in 

 1906, it was the first commercially successful offset press and marked 

 the beginning of the large and growing industry of offset lithography. 

 It was a gift from the Harris-Intertype Corporation. 



The most important print accession was Kaethe Kollwitz's lithograph, 

 Saaljruchte sol/en nicht vermahlen werden, her last print and one of only 

 three known copies. This print was obtained with the help of a 

 generous gift from Dr. Otto Kallir. The German Expressionist^ print 




Lithograph by Kaethe Kollwitz, Saatfrikhte sollen nicht vermahlen werden, recently 

 acquired for the print collection. Below: Briefcase and other personal 

 possessions of the late Adlai E. Stevenson, used by him when he was the 

 U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, °ift of Mrs. Ernest L. Ives. 



® 



^ 




Early attempt at a useful computing machine, made by de Lepine in 1725. 

 Below: The Atlas guidance computer Mod I set up as a special operating 

 exhibit in the hall of chemistry, September 1965. 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 245 



holdings were strengthened by the addition of works by Karl Schmidt- 

 Rottluff and Lovis Corinth. Original blocks and prints by Uniichi 

 Hiratsuka and George O'Connell were gifts of the Washington Print 

 Club. Other important accessions were Edouard Manet's color litho- 

 graph, Polichinelle, John Baptist Jackson's Descent from the Cross, and 

 important works by American artists, including Edward Hopper's 

 Night Shadows, five posters by John Sloan, and prints by Bellows, 

 Hartley, Lasansky, Frasconi, Kohn, and Baskin. Examples of con- 

 temporary printmaking techniques were enriched by the acquisition of 

 original plates and prints by Michael Ponce de Leon and Andrew 

 Stasik. Twenty-five old manuscripts were given by the University of 

 Montana. 



A number of accessions of significance to the history of photography 

 were received. The Bell Telephone Laboratories presented the proto- 

 type and the earliest production model of the Fastax, the first com- 

 mercially successful high-speed motion-picture camera, first man- 

 ufactured in 1943. C. F. Carlson and the Xerox Corporation 

 presented Carlson's laboratory experimental materials leading to the 

 development of the Xerographic process, and the apparatus built 

 by Carlson to demonstrate the practicability of automating his image 

 duplicating process. Richard Avedon donated 100 of the original 

 negatives (with prints) used in his books, Observations (1959) and 

 Nothing Personal (1964). Graflex, Inc. donated 16 early examples 

 of their cameras. The Technicolor Corporation gave their first two 

 color motion-picture camersa which, with the two received last year, 

 provide the section with a thorough technological documentation 

 of that process from 1916 to the present time. The Johns Hopkins 

 University has made available four early rocket-borne cameras, 

 including the first cameras to take pictures from a rocket above the 

 earth's atmosphere. This historical event took place in 1946 when 

 the photographic equipment was carried in a captured V-2 rocket 

 to an altitude of 70 miles over New Mexico. The U.S. Navy prepared 

 and presented the world's longest panoramic photograph, a single 

 color transparency 175 feet long that covers a 4-mile section of the 

 United States from the east to the west coast. 



An interesting late- 17th-century tapestry was presented by Gerson 

 Nordlinger. A handsome brocaded silk fabric of the first half of the 

 18th century was given by Lt. Col. Kibbey M. Home, U.S.A. This 

 example from France is especially fine because of the rich use of gold 

 and silver threads and the fine condition of the richly colored silk yarns. 



An important early Jacquard woven picture of 1844 was received. 

 The woven design commemorates the visit of the Due d'Anmale to 

 the atelier of M. Carquillat, the weaver of the picture. An excellent 




246 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



detailed rendering of a Jacquard loom is included in the design. Eight 

 outstanding examples of lace and embroidery of the 17th through 

 the 19th centuries were presented by Mrs. Hugh Bullock and Mrs. 

 Robert Goetz. Included in this group is a deep flounce of beautiful 

 17th-century Gros Point de Venise lace. Mrs. Frank D. Edgington 

 presented a poignant mourning picture, painted in 1828 on cotton 

 velvet by Hannah Converse, grandmother of Mark Hanna. An 

 indigo-blue wool quilted counterpane, ca. 1800, gift of Mr. and Mrs. 

 Wilbur James Fraser, was added to the collection of bed coverings. 



For the hall of petroleum a number of items were acquired. Baroid 

 Division of the National Lead Company prepared, in cooperation with 

 the curator, an exhibit explaining the use of drilling muds. Cameo 

 Inc. gave two working models of gas-pumping methods; an original 

 Amerada bottom hole pressure gauge came from the Geophysical Re- 

 search Corporation; while the French Atomic Authority provided an 

 elegant model of Deca II, their experiment in thermonuclear fusion. 

 The Shell Development Company collaborated with the curator in the 

 design of a demonstration of underwater completion methods. The 

 Museum acquired the Dunning cyclotron and arranged to take the 

 McMillan synchrotron; both are pioneer acceleration machines impor- 

 tant in the history of nuclear physics. Kenneth Jewett presented to 

 the national collections a further installment of his collection of tinware. 



CIVIL HISTORY 



Of architectural interest is the generous gift of Bruce and Calderon 

 Howe of several mantels, stair rails, doors, and other elements from 

 their now dismantled H Street, NW., house in Washington. Mrs. Van 

 Horn Ely gave two fine side chairs made in New York, ca. 1830. An 

 example of frontier folk life is a chair made about 1870 on a ranch in 

 Mendocino, California, the gift of Mr. and Mrs. Eaton L. Grimes. 

 An inevitable phase of 19th-century life was a horse-drawn hearse; a 

 good example was given jointly by the Litchfield Historical Society 

 and the Torrington Historical Society, both of Connecticut. Some 

 fifty pieces of American furniture, dating from the third quarter of the 

 19th century, have been acquired for the offices and conference rooms 

 of the original Smithsonian Institution building, designed by James 

 Renwick. The principal rooms will gradually be furnished with ma- 

 terial reflecting the early decades of the building's use and the Institu- 

 tion's growth. 



As a result of the collecting activities of Scott Odell, of the division 

 of musical instruments, in the southern mountains, notable additions 

 were made to the collections of traditional American musical instru- 

 ments: These include several Appalachian dulcimers, two frettless 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 247 



banjos from Virginia and Tennessee, and two fold violins. The col- 

 lections also were augmented by a cello made by Abraham Prescott, a 

 cello-shop sign of the late 18th century, and a Rhythmicon, an elec- 

 tronic device used in the teaching of rhythmic counterpoint by Joseph 

 Schillinger, author of The Mathematical Basis of the Arts, generously 

 donated by Mrs. Joseph Schillinger. Several exceptional musical in- 

 struments of European origin were also acquired: A French harpsi- 

 chord made by Benoist Stehlin in Paris in 1 760, one of the few French 

 harpsichords still in existence; a fine 4-keyed bassoon made by Milhouse 

 in England in the 18th century; and a rare bassoon tutor. 



Significant association objects acquired during the past year, include 

 a sack suit worn by Dwight D. Eisenhower during his term as President, 

 and other personal items, gifts from General Eisenhower. The First 

 Ladies collection was enriched by a sequined ball gown and wrap worn 

 by Mrs. Warren G. Harding. A briefcase and personal items of Adlai 

 Stevenson, used during his tenure as Ambassador to the United Nations, 

 were the gifts of Mrs. Ernest L. Ives, his sister. Among the additions 

 to the collections of political Americana were a banner representing the 

 candidates Polk and Dallas from the campaign of 1844, a gift of 

 Robert Cochran, and a portrait of Henry Clay by J. W. Dodge, 

 painted in 1843, the gift of Mrs. Randolph Kidder. 



A large number of foreign banks and financial institutions, repre- 

 senting more than 40 countries, contributed to the growth of the 

 numismatic collections. Many additions of ancient coins, mainly 

 Greek bronzes, came from Mr. Harvey Stack and from Mr. and Mrs. 

 Mortimer Neinken, who also donated a comprehensive collection of 

 paper currencies of the Austrian Empire. The series of medieval coins 

 was increased through donations received from Mrs. Milton Holmes. 

 Remarkable additions were received in the field of United States paper 

 currencies, among them an extremely rare 3-penny note issued by 

 the Colony of Massachusetts in 1722, given by B. M. Douglas, and a 

 unique $10,000 United States Treasury Note (1862) donated by 

 Grover Criswell. An historically significant group of designs and 

 engravings by Christian Gobrecht, one of the foremost United States 

 Mint engravers of the first half of the 19th century, was received from 

 Max J. Humbert, James Harper, Frank Darner, and Clark A. Keyser. 

 The collections of foreign medals were increased particularly by 302 

 Latin-American medals and tokens contributed by the Hon. and Mrs. 

 R. Henry Norweb. 



The rare Sullivan's Dispatch Post stamp of 1853, affixed to a 

 magazine mailed in Cincinnati, was received as a gift from an anony- 

 mous donor in memory of the late George B. Sloane, a writer 

 well known for his philatelic scholarship. The stamp is one of two 




248 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 MUSEUM OF HISTORY & TECHNOLOGY 



known copies preserved on an original cover. A letter of 1769, sent 

 from Dinwiddie County, Virginia, to Ayr, England, in 1769 and 

 containing interesting references to discussions in the House of 

 Burgesses, was purchased through the Milton A. Holmes Memorial 

 fund. Rare airmail stamps and souvenir sheets of Korea were pur- 

 chased through the Charles and Rosanna Batchelor Memorial fund. 

 Mrs. Renee R. Bowden donated an outstanding group of 19th- 

 century stampless covers and folded letters of Thurn & Taxis, Bavaria, 

 Hanover, Prussia, Saxony, and Wurttemberg. Mr. and Mrs. Robert 

 O. D. Hopkins donated additional drawings, models, essays, proofs, 

 and stamps of China and a significant collection of stamp-engraving 

 tools. 



ARMED FORCES HISTORY 



A collection of several hundred glass fragments from a wreck site with 

 an associated date of 1 783 may prove to be of great significance to the 

 student of glass, as it is possible that a number of the fragments are 

 from the Amelung Glass Works. 



A large collection of ordnance materials from VHerminie, 1838, was 

 added to the already substantial finds from that site. 



Several brass engine-room fittings from the Marie Celeste, a Confed- 

 erate blockade runner sunk in Bermuda waters, has given the collec- 

 tions a group of significant materials not hitherto represented. 



A rare Colt Texas Patterson revolver was received from Charles M. 

 Williams, and a rare and unusual engraved powder horn of the period 

 of the French and Indian War was received from Lewis Allen. General 

 Nathan Twining, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, pre- 

 sented his entire collection of uniforms, including a unique dress uni- 

 form designed by himself. A large collection of interesting Civil War 

 material, including a number of rare specimens, was acquired as a gift 

 from Mrs. Florence Wieland. 



Among donations related to naval history particularly notable was 

 an original manuscript copy of Francis Drake's famous letter announc- 

 ing his daring attack on the Spanish Fleet at Cadiz on April 19, 1587, 

 presented by James G. Stahlman of Nashville, Tennessee. This his- 

 toric document, recording an event that significantly contributed to 

 the defeat of the Armada and the emergence of British sea power, 

 represents a superb element of the colonial exhibits introductory to the 

 halls of the Armed Forces of the United States. Also outstanding was 

 the donation by John A. Foard of two pigs of lead ballast founded at 

 Liverpool during the Civil War and recently recovered from the wreck 




THE COLLECTIONS GIFTS AND ADDITIONS 249 



of the Confederate blockade runner Modern Greece off Wilmington, 

 North Carolina. 



A handsomely wrought model of the American privateer Prince de 

 Neufchatel, which had a distinguished fighting career during the War of 

 1812, was completed and placed on display. The model of another 

 celebrated American commerce raider, the Confederate cruiser Ala- 

 bama, also was received, as was a model of the USS dishing, first of the 

 United States Navy's commissioned torpedo boats and an important 

 precursor of the modern destroyer. 




Exhibits 



Two Science and Technology halls were opened in part. The sec- 

 tion of the hall of physical sciences devoted to classical physics, plus all 

 of mathematics and two period rooms in chemistry, were available for 

 viewing at the 50th Anniversary Meeting of the American Optical 

 Society in March, and were opened to the public on April 1 . Sections 

 on modern physics and on chemistry remain to be completed. The 

 hall of medical sciences was open to the public in May, although the 

 hall of health is still incompleted. 



A special exhibit of the Atlas ground guidance computer Mod I, 

 planned by associate curator Uta Merzbach, was opened in the hall of 

 physical sciences and will be on display through the first half of 1967. 

 The Burroughs Corporation, manufacturers of the computer, assisted 

 in making it operational, and daily lecture-demonstrations are being 

 given by museum technicians George A. Norton and Charles E. 

 Dennison. The exhibit includes a film of the computer at work guiding 

 rockets from Cape Kennedy. Dr. Merzbach also prepared a special 

 exhibit of ruling and dividing engines for the American Optical Society 

 meeting, and this will continue to be on view throughout the year in 

 the special exhibits area of the hall of physical sciences. The exhibit 

 features equipment by Nobert, Fasoldt, Rogers, Rutherfurd, and Row- 

 land, to complement the classic machines by Ramsden and Michelson 

 on display in the permanent exhibit. 



A special show of fine prints from the civil engineering collection was 

 assembled for the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Serv- 

 ice. Two special exhibits of watches were held: one, featuring the 

 Zale collection from Dallas, consisted of finely enameled and richly 

 decorated pieces, and the other, watches and chronometers from the 

 newly acquired James Arthur collection. A dental exhibit of 19th- 

 century office furnishings and instruments was prepared and loaned to 

 the District of Columbia Dental Society for display and lecture-dem- 

 onstrations were begun by technician Elliot Sivowitch in the hall of 

 electricity and by technician Marion Jarboe, in the 1855 machine 

 shop in the hall of tools. 



The popular beehive exhibit is again on public view in the farm 

 machinery hall, a new hive having been furnished by the Department 

 of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland. A feeding station to supplement 



250 




Hall of physical sciences: Telescope and other equipment for a 19th-century 

 observatory. In the exhibit of telescope lens and mirrors (left) is the glass 

 for a 62-inch reflecting telescope mirror cast and polished in the 1890s. 

 Never used, it was for years the largest ever made in the United States. 

 Below: Shop front of 19th-century optician and walk-in exhibit. 




Repairing an early- 19th-cen- 

 tury ophicleide in the music 

 restoration laboratory (photo 

 courtesy Washington Post) . 



Hall of everyday life in the 

 American past: Library of 

 about 1 890 from the house of 

 B. B. Comegys of Phila- 

 delphia, re-erected as a 

 period-room exhibit. Most 

 of the original furnishings 

 and books of this library, 

 which is sheathed in wood, 

 have been recovered. 




MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY EXHIBITS 251 



the nectar available in the area was established on the roof of the 

 Museum. A model of a 1901 Huber steam tractor was put on display 

 in September, as was a temporary exhibit of the Frick steam engine. 

 The hall of ceramics and gallery of glass were formally opened on 

 April 22, 1966, in the presence of a distinguished company of donors 

 and collectors. Three special exhibitions were held during the year. 



The 10th International Exhibition of Ceramic Arts, sponsored by the 

 Kiln Club of Washington, D.G., was on view from October 29 to 

 December 13, 1965. 



Glass in Germany, illustrating German glass from ancient times to 

 the present and sponsored by the German Arts Council in cooperation 

 with the National Carl Schurz Association, was on view January 1 to 

 February 20, 1966. 



Ceramic Arts — U.S.A. — 1966, presenting the latest work of a number 

 of important contemporary American ceramic artists and sponsored 

 by the International Minerals and Chemical Corporation, was on view 

 May 2 to June 30, 1966, and will be circulated nationally by the 

 Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service. 



Completion of wall cases for the graphic arts gallery provided needed 

 space for special exhibitions. The following shows were presented: 



The Etchings of Canaletto, September 15 to November 15, 1965. 



Making Faces, caricatures by Aline Fruhauf, November 1 6, 1 965 to 

 January 16, 1966. 



Old Master Prints from the Collections, December 8, 1965 to May 2, 

 1966. 



German Expressionist Prints, January 17 to May 2, 1966. 

 Preparatory work was done for a major exhibition, Australian Prints 

 Today, to open July 15, 1966, that will be the first full showing of 

 Australian prints in the United States. 



The special print display program of the new gallery of photography 

 was inaugurated, June 17- August 1, 1965, with the show originally 

 produced for the 1965 White House Festival of the Arts. It featured 

 work by American photographers, selected from the collections of the 

 Metropolitan Museum of Art, Museum of the City of New York, 

 Museum of Modern Art, Library of Congress, and the Smithsonian 

 Institution. Other exhibitions were: 



Children of the World, a one-man show of photographs by Ken Hey- 

 man, one of America's notable young photographers, September 15 to 

 December 8, 1965. 



Twenty Tears of News Photography, selected from the files of the AP 

 and the UPI news agencies, and including all the Pulitzer prize-winning 

 news photographs, 1942-1966, May 12 to July 15, 1966. 




252 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



To test the feasibility of exhibits for the blind, curator Grace R. 

 Cooper selected objects from the reference collections that would best 

 illustrate the textile subjects to be discussed in two half-hour sessions. 

 These included the basic fibers cotton, wool, flax, silk, and man-made 

 fibers, and the basic processes of ginning, carding, spinning, and 

 weaving. A 4-harness loom with examples of plain, patterned, bro- 

 caded, tapestry, and related fabrics was provided, and three docents 

 were trained to conduct sightless persons on tours of the exhibit. This 

 special project was run in conjunction with a NASA exhibit on the 

 history of flight, also designed for the blind, and together they gave 

 experience of great value to the division of vocational guidance, U.S. 

 Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, which had supported 

 the project with a grant. The weekly weaving demonstrations, dis- 

 continued to permit restoration of the wood frame of the loom, were 

 replaced by weekly demonstrations of handspinning by associate cura- 

 tor Rita Adrosko and museum technician Lois Vann. Miss Adrosko 

 also explained the art of handspinning on TV Channel 26 in Window 

 on Our World, an educational program designed for Metropolitan 

 Washington school children. A temporary exhibit of Victorian Needle- 

 work is being prepared for initial showing in the Museum, after which 

 it will be circulated by the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibi- 

 tion Service. 



Important recent acquisitions are being incorporated into the new 

 textile hall in the Museum of History and Technology now being pre- 

 pared for opening in 1967. 



Active installation of the hall of petroleum has begun. The mural to 

 be installed at the entrance to the hall was shown to the visitors to the 

 International Petroleum Exposition at Tulsa, Oklahoma. Designed 

 to be a guide to the hall as well as a realistic summary of oil technology 

 and skills, it was painted by Delbert Jackson, staff artist of the Pan 

 American Oil Corporation under the sponsorship of a group organized 

 by Helmerich and Payne of Tulsa. Plans for the hall of nuclear energy 

 were virtually completed, as were those for hall of iron and steel. 

 Substantial gifts for the construction of models were received from the 

 Ford Motor Company fund and from the United States Steel Corpora- 

 tion, and four fine models prepared by Bethlehem Steel Company, 

 among the recent deliveries, were placed on temporary exhibition. 



The division of manufactuers and heavy industries acting as host to 

 the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, provided space for and assisted 

 in the installation of a life sciences radiation laboratory as a temporary 

 exhibit. Manned by LASL staff members with the assistance of local 

 students, it provided live demonstrations of the uses of radiation in 

 modern life and has been of exceptional interest to the public. W 1 1 1 i 




MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY EXHIBITS 253 



the completion of the installation of the Tuve Van de Graaff accelerator 

 by museum specialist Abraham Richards and museum technicians 

 John Garter and Francis Gadson, the opportunity was taken to set up 

 a small exhibit of nuclear energy material, including the Spitzer 

 Stellarator, the "pickle barrel" reactor, and the Dunning cyclotron. 



An additional period room was opened in the hall of everyday life 

 in the American past, the private library of Benjamin B. Comegys, 

 originally added to his Philadelphia house about 1880. Through 

 Comegys' relatives and with the assistance of Hubert H. Howson, who 

 administered his estate, many of the original furnishings and most of 

 the books were recovered. Numerous photographs taken between 

 1880 and 1900, some of which were published in Comegys' book 

 A Tour Around My Library, made it possible to re-create the room very 

 nearly as it was lived in — an example of the taste and customs of a 

 prosperous Philadelphian of the late 19th century. 



In conjunction with the Smithsonian conference on the role of 

 historic archeology, an exhibit ot artifacts recoverea in salvage arche- 

 ology in the Gadsby Urban Renewal project in Alexandria, Virginia, 

 was displayed in the first-floor rotunda. 



An exhibition of keyboard instruments in honor of the Smithsonian 

 Bicentennial was opened in the hall of musical instruments for Sep- 

 tember 1965. During this month museum technician Helen Hollis 

 gave daily lecture-recitals for museum visitors on and about the restored 

 keyboard instruments. 



A special security case for historic jewelry placed in the hall of 

 American costume, holds the Napoleon necklace, Marie-Antoinette 

 earrings, and Empress Eugenie blue diamond, all presented by Mrs. 

 Merriweather Post, as well as fine jewels of the 20th century, including 

 important examples made by Harry Winston. 



A special display featuring Smithsonian Institution award medals, 

 arranged by associate curator Elvira Clain-Stefanelli on the occasion 

 of the James Smithson Bicentennial, contained original models and 

 bronze strikings of the new Hodgkins medal, designed in 1965 by 

 Albino Manca, and the Smithsonian Award medal by Paul Vincze. 

 The latter, presented for the first time to The Royal Society of London, 

 shows on the obverse a portrait of James Smithson and on the reverse 

 the Smithsonian's first building on the Mall. 



United States and foreign gold coins and medals from the F. A. Hauck 

 donation were selected for a display arranged in a semiautomatic ex- 

 hibit case containing 30 trays, each with an average of 14 coins. The 

 trays are suspended on a continuous chain device driven by an elec- 

 trical motor, and two command buttons enable the visitor to select 



230-J57— 66 21 




254 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — HISTORY AND ART 



and move into view the tray he wishes to examine. Electronic devices 

 prevent unauthorized access to the material on display. 



The plaster-of-paris mannequins in the First Ladies hall are being 

 replaced with identical mannequins of light polyester resin, which 

 are easier to handle and aid the technical staff in preserving the dresses 

 when they must be moved. 



A revised exhibit, installed in the hall of philately and postal history 

 to coincide with the opening of the Sixth International Philatelic Ex- 

 hibition, was especially designed to show portions of the collection 

 never previously exhibited or representative of materials generally 

 held in the reference collections. 



During the year the department of armed forces history opened halls 

 illustrating U.S. armed forces history through the Civil War, the hall 

 of medals and decorations, the hall of ordnance, and the exhibit of 

 gondola Philadelphia. Installation of individual exhibits in these halls 

 is continuing. 



Curator Peter C. Welsh organized two special exhibits, each accom- 

 panied by a publication: "The Trotter in America," designed by 

 Nadya Kayaloff, a study of America's first sports hero based on 19th- 

 century prints from the Harry T. Peters lithography collection, supple- 

 mented by a selection of related objects from the Museum collections; 

 and "The Art and Spirit of a People," designed by Robert Widder, a 

 continuing special exhibit in which approximately 150 objects from the 

 Eleanor and Mabel Van Alstyne folk art collection are used to illustrate 

 values, attitudes, and interests prevalent in 19th-century America. 

 Plans were made for a temporary exhibit of lithographs and objects 

 relating to the genteel female of the Victorian era. 



Two major installations were completed for permanent exhibits in 

 the growth of the United States halls being designed by Mrs. Deborah 

 Bretzfelder: the wheels and gearing from a 1774 grist mill in Chester 

 County, Pennsylvania, and a house frame from Ipswich, Massachusetts, 

 dating from the 1690s and the 1750s. 



Further details concerning the construction of exhibits for the Mu- 

 seum of History and Technology are to be found in the report of the 

 U.S. National Museum, Office of Exhibits, pages 47-50. 




Special exhibit honoring Jawaharlal Nehru, showing scenes from his life and 

 containing objects illustrating the culture of India. Below: Hall of ceramics 

 which, with the nearby hall of glass, was formally opened in April 1966. 




Possibly the earliest American-made carriage in existence, this 18th-century 

 chaise, recently restored, is exhibited in the vehicle hall. Below: The 

 Trotter in America, a special exhibit based on prints in the Harry T. Peters 

 lithography collection, also contained equipment used in this sport, which 

 rose to popularity in the 19th century. 




Staff Publications 



SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 



Battison, Edwin A. 100 years of machine tool progress. Metal- 

 working Magazine (September 1965), pp. 1-8. 

 — • — — . Stone-cutting and polishing lathe by Jacques Besson. 



Technology and Culture (Spring 1966), vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 202-205. 

 Bedini, Silvio A. Lens-making for scientific instrumentation in the 



seventeenth century. Applied Optics (May 1966), vol. 5, no. 5, 



pp. 687-694, 12 figs. 

 . The makers of Galileo's scientific instruments. In Atti del 



Simposio su "Galileo Galilei nella storia e nella filosofia delta sdenza" 



(Florence, 1966), pp. 1-27, 8 figs. 

 Cannon, Walter F. History at the Smithsonian. Smithsonian Journal 



of History (Spring 1966), vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 65-72. 

 Chapelle, Howard I. The Chesapeake Bay. Popular Boating (July 



1965), vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 4-6. 

 Finn, Bernard S. Controversy and the growth of the electrical art. 



IEEE Spectrum (January 1966), vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 52-56. 

 Hamarneh, Sami K. The first independent treatise on cosmetology 



in Spain. Bulletin of the History of Medicine (July-August 1965), 



vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 309-325. 

 . Smithsonian exhibits on pharmaceutical history. Journal 



of the American Pharmaceutical Association (August 1965), vol. n.s.5, 



no. 8, pp. 434-^r35, 438. 



Al-Kindi, a ninth-century philosopher, physician, and 



scholar. Medical History (October 1965), vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 328-342. 



Jackson, Melvin H. Greenland and the "Vinland Map." Car- 

 tographer (June 1966) (in press). 



Multhauf, Robert P. Sal ammoniac: a case history in industrial- 

 ization. Technology and Culture (Fall 1965), vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 569- 

 586. 



. What is a metal? In The Sorby centennial symposium on the 



history of metallurgy, ed. C. S. Smith. New York: Gorden and 

 Breach, 1965, pp. 139-144. 



Warner, Deborah J. George Willis Ritchey and the development 

 of celestial photography. American Scientist (March 1966), vol. 54, 

 no. 1, pp. 64-94. 



White, John H. Cincinnati locomotive builders 1845-1868. (U.S. 

 National Museum Bulletin 245), 167 pp., 56 figs., 1965. 



255 




256 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — HISTORY AND ART 



American high wheel singles. Railway and Locomotive His- 



torical Society Bulletin, no. 114 (April 1966), pp. 27-36, 6 figs. 



Locomotives on stone. Smithsonian Journal of History (Spring 



1966), vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 49-60, 14 figs. 



ARTS AND MANUFACTURES 



Bishop, Philip W. [Review] Iron and Steel in Nineteenth Century 



America, by Peter Temin. Isis, vol. 56, pt. 4, p. 483. 

 Cooper, Grace R. Quilting. Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 18, 



pp. 965-966, 1966. 

 — . The carpet-bag. Spinning Wheel, a National Magazine About 



Antiques (July-August 1966), vol. 22, no. 7-8, pp. 14-16, 37. 

 Gardner, P. V. Meissen and Other German Porcelain in the Alfred Duane 



Pell Collection. Smithsonian publ. 4256 (1956) revised (Wash- 

 ington: Smithsonian Institution, 1966), pp. 68. 

 . Eighteenth-century porcelain at the Smithsonian. Antiques 



(September 1965), vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 336-340. 

 Haberstich, David E. Which history of photography is best? 



Popular Photography, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 75, 122-125, 1966. 

 Miller, J. Jefferson II. The Larsen and McCauley collections 



at the Smithsonian Institution. Antiques (October 1965), vol. 87, 



no. 4, pp. 522-525. 



. The Washington Monument in Baltimore. Baltimore: Peale 



Museum, January 1966, pp. 16. 

 Morse, Peter. Rembrandt's etching technique: an example, 



Paper 61 in Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology 



(U.S. National Museum Bulletin 250), pp. 93-108, 1966. 

 Ostroi-f, Eugene. Early Fox Talbot photographs and restoration by 



neutron irradiation. Journal of Photographic Science, vol. 13, no. 5, 



pp. 213-227, 1965. 

 Schlebecker, John T. The Great Holding Action: The NFO in 



September, 1962. Agricultural History (October 1965) pp. 204-213. 



CIVIL HISTORY 



Brown, Howard Mayer. Instrumental music printed before 1600. 

 Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1965, 559 pp. 



Clain-Stefanelli, Elvira. Italian coin engravers since 1800. Pa- 

 per 33 in Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology 

 (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 229) 68 pp., illus., 1965. 



— . Numismatics — an ancient science. Paper 32 in Contributions 



from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National Museum 

 Bulletin 229), 102 pp., illus., 1965. 




MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY PUBLICATIONS 257 



Clain-Stefanelli, Vladimir. Money. In The World Book Encyclo- 

 pedia, pp. 588-598d, 1965. 



• — . Historical notes on coinage metals. Coins, pp. 32-36, 50-53, 



1965. 



• • — . Monetary history and medallic art at the Smithsonian Institu- 



tion. Numisma, no. 75, pp. 31-4-8, 1965. 

 — — . An application of physics in ancient numismatics: detection 



of certain counterfeit Aegina staters through X-ray diffraction 



analysis. American Journal of Archaeology, vol. 70. p. 185, 1966. 

 Collins, Herbert R. Original panels from Jackson's phaeton found. 



Carriage Journal (Autumn 1965), vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 73-75. 

 •- — ■ — ■ — . White House stables and garages. Records of the Columbia 



Historical Society, Washington, D.C., 1966. 

 Fesperman, John. Music for a small organ. Journal of Church Music 



(July-August, 1966), vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 6-11. 

 Howland, Richard H. Icomos in Poland. Newsletter of The Society 



of Architectural Historians (September 1965), vol. 9, no. 4, p. 2. 

 • — ■ — — . The American school of classical studies in Athens. Bulletin 



of the Archaeological Institute of America (November 1965), vol. 56, 



p. 21. 



Travelers to Olympus. Pp. 147-150 in With heritage so rich 



(A Report of a Special Committee on Historic Preservation, Albert 

 Rains, Chairman). New York: Random House, N.Y., 1966. 



Klapthor, Margaret Brown. Presentation Pieces in the Museum 

 of History and Technology. Paper 47 in Contributions from the 

 Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National Museum Bul- 

 letin 241), pp. 81-108, 1965. 



• — ■ — — . Benjamin Latrobe and Dolley Madison decorate the White 

 House, 1809-1811. Paper 49 in Contributions from the Museum of 

 History and Technology (U.S. National Museum Bulletin 241), 

 pp. 153-164, 1965. 



Melder, Keith E. Angel of mercy in Washington: Josephine Grifnng 

 and the Freedmen, 1864-1872. Records of the Columbia Historical 

 Society, Washington, D.C., 1966. 



Scheele, Carl H. Pneumatic tube mail service in the United States. 

 Society of Philatelic Americans, Journal (May 1966), vol. 28, no. 9, 

 pp. 639-648, 4 figs. 



. The Smithsonian's philatelic and postal history exhibits. 



Stamps (May 14, 1966), vol. 135, no. 7, pp. 330-331, 2 figs. 



. Smithsonian's philatelic and postal history holdings grew 



from 1,733-stamp gift in 1888. Linn's Weekly Stamp News (May 16, 

 1966), vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 36-37, 3 figs. 




258 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



ARMED FORCES HISTORY 



Howell, Edgar M. Harvey Dunn: the searching artist who 



came home to his first horizon. Montana, The Magazine of Western 



History, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 41-56, 27 pis., 1966. 

 Lundeberg, Philip K. The continental gunboat Philadelphia and the 



northern campaign of 1776. pp. 20, 1966. 

 Peterson, Mendel. Underwater thesaurus. Antiques (September 



1965), vol. 88, pp. 319-324. 



AMERICAN STUDIES 



Washburn, Wilcomb E., The museum and Joseph Henry. Curator 



(May 1965), vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 35-54. 

 . Law and authority in Colonial Virginia. Chapter in Law 



and authority in Colonial America, edit. George A. Billias (Barre, 



Mass., 1965), pp. 116-135. 

 . Virginia's first families and the first families of Virginia. 



Chapter in Exploring Virginia's human resources, edit. Roscoe D. 

 Hughes and Henry Leidheiser, Jr. (Charlottesville: University 

 of Virginia Press, 1965) pp. 8-18. 

 — . A proposal concerning a war game involving guerrillas, 

 counter-guerrillas, and civilians. Background, the Journal of the 

 International Studies Association (August 1965) pp. 147-153. 

 (ed.) The great design: Two lectures on the Smithson bequest 



by John Cniincy Adams. Washington, D. C: Smithsonian Institution, 

 1965, pp. 100. 



GROWTH OF THE UNITED STATES 



Welsh, Peter C. American folk art: The art and spirit of a people. 



Washington, 1965. 100 pp., 65 illus. 

 . The trotter in America. Washington: Smithsonian Institution 



(publ. 4637), 1965. 20 pp., 30 illus. 

 — . The Van Alstyne American folk art collection Antiques (Au- 



gust 1965), vol. 88, pp. 208-211, 15 illus. 



. The metallic woodworking plane. An American contribu- 

 tion to hand-tool design, Technology and Culture (January 1966, 

 Winter), pp. 38-47. 



Woodworking tools 1600-1900. Paper 51 in Contributions 



from the Museum of History and Technology (U.S. National Museum 

 Bulletin 241), pp. 178-228, 65 illus., 1966. 




National Air and Space Museum 



S. Paul Johnston, Director 



Legislation authorizing construction of a National Air and Space 

 J Museum was cleared by both Houses of Congress late in June 1966, 

 after several years of consideration by the 88th and 89th Congresses. 



During this period of legislative consideration, plans and programs 

 for the proposed facility and its exhibits had gone forward as rapidly 

 as current personnel and budgetary limitations permitted. All such 

 activities conducted throughout the fiscal year were consistent with 

 the master operational plan approved by the Secretary in August 1965. 



Resume of Legislative Action 



S. 2602 of the 88th Congress, "The National Air Museum Amend- 

 ments Act of 1964," passed the Senate on July 23, 1964, following an 

 extended hearing in the Subcommittee on the Smithsonian Institution 

 of the Committee on Rules and Administration. That Committee 

 reported S. 2602 to the floor of the Senate on July 22, 1964. The 

 House did not complete favorable action on this bill before adjournment, 

 thus it was necessary to reintroduce the legislation during the 89th 

 Congress. H.R. 6125 of the 89th Congress, "The National Air Museum 

 Amendments Act of 1965," was reported from the Committee on House 

 Administration on September 21, 1965, and was passed by the House 

 of Representatives on February 7, 1966. It was then referred to the 



259 




260 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Senate Committee on Rules and Administration, which reported it to 

 the floor of the Senate on June 28, 1966. The Senate passed this 

 legislation on June 29, 1966, thus finalizing Congressional action on 

 legislation to authorize a suitable museum for the national air and 

 space collections, a project initiated nearly 20 years ago.* Funds to 

 construct this Museum remain to be appropriated by the Congress. 



New Facility Planning Program 



Staff planning for the distribution of floor space and the development 

 of specific exhibits in the new facility have been under study contin- 

 uously throughout the year. An analysis of the Air Museum's role 

 and missions, both with respect to the Smithsonian Institution and to 

 its own internal programming, is continuously under review. From 

 such considerations a clearer picture is beginning to emerge as to how 

 the large and complicated structure designed by Gyo Obata can best 

 be adapted to serve the needs of the millions of Americans who are 

 expected to stream through its halls annually. 



As an aid to such planning, a relatively large scale (1 in. = 6 ft.) 

 model of the building has been procured. The scale was selected to 

 match the scale of a large collection of aircraft and spacecraft models 

 now on hand. Strictly a planning tool, it has been designed to be 

 completely demountable, both vertically and horizontally, so that every 

 part of the building can be exposed for detail study and for the correla- 

 tion of all its elements. The model, presently on display, will eventually 

 be moved into the exhibits planning department. 



Organizational Changes 



Certain changes in personnel alignment were carried out in ac- 

 cordance with the master plan, approved in August 1965, which 

 establishes five major departments in the museum: Aeronautics, 

 astronautics, education and information, exhibits, and administration. 

 Considerable assistance was rendered during this year to the education 

 and information department by an outside consultant, and progress 

 was made in analyzing the problem involved in the establishment of 

 an NASM Research Center. This problem involved sorting out, 

 segregating, rearranging, and indexing the vast amount of specimen 

 and research material which had accumulated over the years at the 

 Silver Hill facility. 



*On July 1 9, 1 966, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Bill into law. 




NATIONAL AIR AND SPACE MUSEUM 261 



As a first step toward defining the problem and developing corrective 

 procedures, a rough screening process for all NASM material at Silver 

 Hill was inaugurated and all items were separated and relocated as 

 follows : 



1. Full-scale flightcraft, engines, and ancillary equipment remain 

 at Silver Hill. 



2. Aircraft models, miscellaneous art, and memorabilia were 

 removed to the 24th Street facility. 



3. All library material, books, pamphlets, reports, drawings, etc., 

 were removed to designated sorting areas in the A&I Building. 



Exhibits Department Established 



A principal feature of the master plan was the establishment on 

 April 1, 1966, of an integrated exhibits department to include not 

 only the normal exhibit design and display function, but also the 

 responsibility for storage, restoration, and preservation of the Museum's 

 aeronautical and astronautical specimens. Headed by James Mahoney 

 as assistant director (exhibits), the department includes three elements: 

 the preservation and restoration division at Silver Hill with Donald 

 Merchant in charge; the model shops and storage area at the 24th 

 Street facility, under the supervision of Winthrop Shaw; and the 

 visual presentation division (Harry Hart, chief) in the Arts and 

 Industries building. It also includes an office of quality control 

 under Walter Male, formerly superintendent of the preservation and 

 restoration division at Silver Hill and one of the most knowledgeable 

 men in the country in aircraft and engine preservation and restoration 

 techniques. 



Working closely with the curators, the quality control officer will 

 establish specifications and requirements for preservation and restora- 

 tion of aircraft, engine, and accessory specimens, and will recommend 

 contractors capable of doing the special jobs that the specimens require. 

 He will also keep in touch with the work as it progresses, both in our 

 own shops and in outside shops, to insure that it is done in accordance 

 with the high standards required. 



Plan for Silver Hill Facility 



Because the physical conditions at the Silver Hill facility leave 

 something to be desired, despite the opening of a new building (build- 

 ing 20), restudy of the operations was undertaken. As a result, a 

 long-term plan was set up for rearranging the storage and shop areas 

 there, and a step-by-step program for physical rearrangement of 




262 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



specimens both indoors and out. With the cooperation and help of 

 the buildings management department, certain areas are being leveled 

 and gravelled so that aircraft in outdoor storage are readily available 

 as study material, and similar rearrangement of specimens stored 

 indoors is also under way. Studies have also been made with respect 

 to size and location of new buildings, if and when they may become 

 available. The objective is to put the Silver Hill facility on a par with 

 the best aircraft storage and restoration activity in the country. 



Model Collection Reorganized 



The Museum has in its collections somewhere between 750 and 1000 

 models of aircraft that vary widely as to scale, quality, and physical 

 condition. A program of model evaluation, repair, and/or disposition 

 was inaugurated under which models of unquestioned importance 

 are to be put into exhibitable condition and preserved properly in 

 individual, well-marked containers; models of less importance are to 

 be properly preserved, but not necessarily in exhibitable condition; and 

 models of no importance are to be disposed of. Winthrop Shaw is 

 custodian of the model collection, and as soon as conditions permit, 

 model makers will be added to the staff and a model shop equipped. 



Reference Files Reorganized 



The library and other reference material stored at Silver Hill in- 

 clude a vast collection of unsorted, uncataloged reference items, and 

 after extensive study by an outside consultant, E. W. Robischon, 

 plans were evolved for screening, cataloging, and organizing it as a 

 nucleus for the eventual Research Center in the new Air and Space 

 Museum. The entire collection has been brought into the Arts and 

 Industries building, where a sorting center was established adjacent 

 to the present research facility and a beginning was made in the task 

 of sorting and indexing. 



Meanwhile, with the cooperation of a number of other government 

 and outside agencies, studies are going forward which will lead to the 

 ultimate selection of a modern system, compatible with other systems 

 in use by government agencies, of storage and retrieval of technical 

 information for the maximum convenience of historical or technical 

 researchers. 



Scholarly Accomplishments 



The Museum's small professional staff, although primarily occupied 

 with internal reorganization and reorientation during the year, has 




NATIONAL AIR AND SPACE MUSEUM 263 



accomplished a certain amount of research in addition to supplying 

 day-to-day responses to outside inquiries in their several fields of 

 interest. Work has continued on 19th-century war rockets, U.S. and 

 European, and Goddard's early research in rocketry and on electric 

 propulsion and associated fields (Durant); on the Balzer-Manley con- 

 tribution in early engine development for the Langley aerodromes and 

 the development of the Liberty engine of World War I (Meyer); on 

 the Wright brothers' methods of aircraft control and the history of 

 U.S. Air Mail Service, 1918-1927 (Garber); on Curtiss aircraft develop- 

 ments, research in development of amphibious aircraft, and research 

 in operational aspects of air cargo, military and commercial (Casey) ; 

 on experimental research in para-wing kites and gliders (Newland) ; and 

 also on a group project developing a definitive biography of Samuel 

 P. Langley. 



Special Activities and Events 



An aerospace art gallery was opened in the Arts and Industries 

 building with special showings of NASA art; an exhibit of creative 

 drawings and paintings on "space" subjects by young children (opened 

 April 1); an experimental exhibit, "Enlightenment for the Blind," 

 developed by NASA in cooperation with the Smithsonian Office of 

 Education and Training; and a permanent exhibit of the Guggenheim 

 aeronautical print collection. 



In October 1965 an Experimental Aircraft Association Exhibit was 

 held. On February 17, 1966, the third Edwin A. Link lecture, "The 

 Apollo Program — A Mid-Stream Appraisal," was given by George M. 

 Low of NASA. On April 4-5, 1966, was held the first international 

 meeting of air and space museum directors and curators, organized 

 and programmed by the Museum staff. 



Exhibits including Gemini-4 and associated materiel were produced 

 for Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey's "Washington Briefing for 

 Young Americans," May 3-12, 1966; and topical displays of current 

 public interest included Mariner-4 equipment and pictures; Surveyor- 1 

 equipment and pictures; Apollo Program equipment; Gemini-4 space- 

 craft and associated equipment, including Colonel White's space suit 

 "umbilical" and maneuvering unit used for the first U.S. space walk; 

 and the Thor rocket inertial guidance system (A/C) and related 

 components. 



Formal presentations of new specimens included a sounding rocket 

 (ARCAS); fuel cell for Gemini (General Electric Co.); turbo-jet engine 

 cutaway model (United Aircraft Corp.); components of a B-17 re- 

 covered after 25 years in arctic ice (Sperry Corp., Vickers Division); 

 solid fuel rocket mock-up (UTC/United Aircraft Corp.). 




264 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Other additions to the National Air and Space collections are listed 

 below. 



Alan Shepard's Mercury spacecraft Freedom- 7 was loaned to the 

 Science Museum, London, and to the Royal Scottish Museum, Edin- 

 burgh, for display during fall 1965 and spring 1966. 



A new exhibit, "from supercharger to turbo-jet engine," was designed 

 and installed in the new aircraft propulsion hall, and a complete nose 

 section of a Douglas DC- 7 transport airplane was installed in the west 

 hall. 



The Museum staff rendered assistance and consulting services on 

 request to members of Congress, to other government agencies (includ- 

 ing NASA, FA A, Library of Congress, National Archives), to various 

 Departments of the Government, to technical associations, and to 

 many companies in the aerospace industry. Educational assistance 

 was rendered to radio and television programs. Curator Paul Garber 

 made 41 lectures on flight history before various historical bodies 

 during the year. And individual staff members served on numerous 

 advisory committees and awards committees (Collier Trophy, Wright 

 Trophy, Brewer Trophy, White Trophy, etc.). 



New Advisory Board Members 



Durng the year two changes in the personnel of the NASM Advisory 

 Board occurred: Major General Rollen H. Anthis, Commander, Head- 

 quarters Command, USAF, was designated by the Chief of the Air 

 Staff a member vice Major General Brooke E. Allen, USAF (Ret.); 

 and the President appointed Colonel John H. Glenn, Jr., USMC 

 (Ret.), to serve in place of General James H. Doolittle, who resigned 

 in January 1965. 



Additions to the Collections 



Additions to the national aeronautical and space collections, received 

 and recorded during the fiscal year 1966, totaled 223 specimens in 59 

 separate accessions, as listed below. Those from Government depart- 

 ments are entered as transfers unless otherwise indicated; others were 

 received as gifts or loans. 



Am Force, Department of the: Mercedes-Benz DB 601-1 E (1944), inverted, in 

 line engine, 1375 hp. (NAM 1636); Wright-Patterson AFB: Air Force models, 

 Douglas A-20, A- 26, C-47, C-54, C-118, C-124, C-133, B-66 1 :48 size, (NAM 

 1667); Scott AFB: 45 aircraft hydraulic component units formerly from training 

 devices board (cutaways) (NAM 1637). 



American Airlines, Maintenance and Engineering Center: Wright turbo-cyclone IB 

 R-3350-TC (1954) engine, 3500 hp., (NAM 1598). 




National Air and Space Museum Advisory Board Member John H. Glenn, 

 on a tour of the Museum with Assistant Director Frederick G. Durant (left) 

 and Director S. Paul Johnston, pause at Glenn's Friendship-7 space capsule 

 to greet a young visitor. Below: Inspecting new model of Museum building 

 are Smithsonian Regents J. William Fulbright, Clinton P. Anderson, 

 Crawford H. Greenewalt, John Nicholas Brown, and Robert V. Fleming. 




Special exhibit "Lollypops and Launch Pads," illustrating children's impres- 

 sions of space technology, intrigues young visitors. Below: Normal summer- 

 day crowd waits to inspect the Gemini-4 space capsule. 




NATIONAL AIR AND SPACE MUSEUM 265 



American Bosch Arma Corp.: Full-scale guidance system mock-up for Atlas 

 ICBM (NAM 1677). 



American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics: 3 liquid-propellant rocket 

 motors and 1 cast-aluminum blank used by American Rocket Society Experi- 

 mental Committee, 1932-34 (NAM 1679). 



Atlantic Research Corp.: ARCAS meteorological sounding rocket and in- 

 strumentation package (NAM 1657). 



Bell Helicopter Co.: Model, Bell UH-1F, 1:32 size (NAM 1646). 



Bensen Aircraft Corp.: First Bensen gyroglider, fabricated from readily avail- 

 able hardware and components (NAM 1609). 



Bitsko, Maj. Leslie P.: 2 WW-II navigational instruments (NAM 1660). 



Black, Archibald: Man's Elgin pocket watch used by donor in timing altitude 

 flight of 18,200 ft. with first 8-cyl. Liberty engine, Aug. 31, 1918 (NAM 1654). 



Commerce, Department of, U.S. Weather Bureau: Contemporary Russian Radio- 

 sonde (NAM 1661). 



Donald, Jack: Two Australian native-made boomerangs (NAM 1665). 



Douglas Aircraft Co.: Model of Douglas DC-7C transport, 1:50 size (NAM 

 1644). 



General Electric Company: Fuel-cell battery developed for NASA Gemini 

 spacecraft, cutaway model (NAM 1672). 



Goddard, Mrs. Robert H.: Bronze reproduction of Daniel Guggenheim Medal 

 awarded to Dr. Robert H. Goddard (NAM 1671). 



Griffin, Lt. Col. Thomas P.: WW-II German Air Force pilot's helmet (NAM 

 1650). 



Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.: Model, Grumman C-2A, carrier on- 

 board delivery aircraft (transport), 1:16 size (NAM 1652). 



Hartman, A. J.: Roberts 4X (ca. 1912) in-line engine, 50 hp. (NAM 1612). 



Ide, Mrs. John J.: Collection of medals and award (NAM 1664). 



Johnston, S. Paul: 2 aviation magnetic compasses, WW-II, 1 German, 1 Japanese 

 (NAM 1663). 



Kirk, Preston: Bentley B. 2, rotary, 9e-cyl., WW-II British engine, 250 hp. (NAM 

 1570). 



Kuhn, Kenneth J.: Control-line model of Smith miniplane (NAM 1647). 



L. L. Walker Co.: Curtiss OXX-6 (ca. 1916), in-line, engine, 100 hp. (NAM 

 1601); Hall-Scott A-7-A (1916), in-line engine, 110 hp. (NAM 1595). 



Laskowitz, L. B.: Powered, scale model of helicopter rotor system, ca. 1945 

 (NAM 1640); 2 models of helicopter rotor systems and 20x33-in. wind tunnel 

 (NAM 1674). 



Loening, Grover: Model, Loening OA-1A (NAM 1656). 



Martin Company: Model, Glenn L. Martin 1909 airplane (NAM 1649). 



McDonnell Aircraft Co.: Model, McDonnell RF-4C in camouflage of Viet 

 Nam war, 1966 (NAM 1645). 



Munroe, Kenneth H.: Rubber stamp used in 1955 in ballistic missile program 

 (NAM 1680). 



Mussey, Robert: Model, of the Hannoveraner CL III, WW-I German 2-place 

 biplane, 1:16 size (NAM 1655). 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Lewis Research Center: Models 

 aircraft and rocket-powered aircraft used for test purposes (NAM 1666). 



Navy, Department of The, Bureau of Aeronautics: Model, Vought F8U-1 Crusader, 



single-place turbo-jet monoplane fighter 1:16 size (NAM 1639); Pratt & Whitney 



R4360-4A (ca. 1948), cutaway, radial ca. 28-cyl. engine, 3500 hp. (NAM 1616); 



Curtiss OX-5 (1917), water-cooled, V8 engine, 90 hp. (NAM 1613); Wheel of 



230-457—66—22 




266 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



B-36 airplane, weight 5500 pounds (NAM 1600); Allison XT40-A-4B (1950), 



turbojet prop engine and propeller, drive shaft, and gearing, 5500 E.S.H.P. (NAM 



1597); Junkers "Jumo" 207 (1943), in line diesel engine, 1000 hp. (NAM 1568); 



Turbo-supercharged Liberty 12A (1922), in line liquid-cooled, V— 12 engine, 



405 hp. (NAM 1590); model, Martin XP6M2 Sea Master, 1:57 size (NAM 



1648); model, Convair XFY1 Pogo, 1:22 size (NAM 1643); model, Piasecki 



HRP-2 helicopter 1:21 size (NAM 1642); high-wing twin tail, pulse-jet powered, 



pilotless, monoplane recovered by parachute, mfg. 1950 (NAM 1669); complete 



dummy SUBROC missile and handling dolly (NAM 1678); color photograph 



of Astronaut Edward White (NAM 1672). 

 Peaslee, Colonel Jesse C: WW-II leather flight jacket used by donor as pilot 



in 9th Fighter Sq., 49th Fighter Gp. (NAM 1676). 

 Pratt and Whitney Aircraft: Model of JT3C turbojet engine, J^ scale (NAM 



1564). 

 Republic Aviation Division (Fairchild-Hiller Corp): Wind tunnel models of the 



Republic P-43, and P-47 aircraft, 1:10 size (NAM 1668). 

 Robert Bosch Corp.: 1 Bosch (gasoline) fuel-injector pump used on Mercedes 



DB-601 engine which powered Messerschmitt ME113R to a world's record 



481.4 mph in 1939 (NAM 1638). 

 Sedell, C. J.: Parts for Hispano-Suiza Curtiss OX5, and Liberty engines; also 



parts for Dixie magneto (NAM 1634). 

 Smith, J. C: Model of L.W.F. biplane with 8-cyl. Liberty engine and model of 



Wright H-1914 airplane, 1:16 size (NAM 1662). 

 Tucker, Roy: Model of Northrup XV35 flying wing, 1:22 size (NAM 1659). 

 United Technology Center (Division of United Aircraft Corp.): Full-scale 



reproduction of P— 1 solid-propellant rocket motor (NAM 1681). 

 Van Dresser, Peter: Rocket motor nozzle from experimental tests of American 



Rocket Society in early 1930's (NAM 1670). 

 Vickers Inc. (Division of Sperry Rand Corp.): B-17 accessory items — -10 in. 



accumulator and electric hydraulic servo-transmission for operating gun turret, 



recovered from wreck of B-17 My Gal Sal which crashed on the Greenland ice 



cap in June 1942 (NAM 1641). 

 Wilkinson, Mrs. Mary Reilly: Admission card to Lindbergh Day Celebration, 



June 11, 1927, for seating on Senate steps, East Front of Capitol (NAM 1651). 

 Wolf, Alfred L.: Berling magneto type D-81— 2 used on Curtiss OX-5 engine 



(NAM 1635). 

 Zinn, Dr. (House of Representatives) : Model collection, manufacturers desk-type 



models, various scales (NAM 1675). 



The Museum's Historical Research Center was greatly enriched 

 during the year with valuable research materials. The cooperation of 

 the following persons and organizations in providing this material is 

 sincerely appreciated and gratefully acknowledged: 



Aero Publishers, Inc. Bledsoe, John F., Jr. 



Alderman, A. K. Brooks, A. Raymond 



Allen, William S. California Institute of Technology, Jet 



American Airlines Propulsion Laboratory 



Berlstein, Chris Casey, Louis S. 



Bendix Corp. Ciesla, Chester 



Blaisdell, Lee Coanda, Henri 




NATIONAL AIR AND SPACE MUSEUM 



267 



Connecticut Aeronautical Historical As- 

 sociation 



Cox, W. G. 



Crotzer, Allan 



Currie, James A. 



Denehie, William A. 



Dietrichson, P. W. K. 



Dupont, Henry C. 



Durant, F. C. Ill 



Engel, Rolf 



Experimental Aircraft Association, 

 Chapter 190 



Fahey, James C. 



Field Enterprises Educational Corp. 



General Aniline and Film Corp. 



Glass, Richard 



Gratz, Charles Murray 



Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. 



Hardie, George Jr. 



Hatch, Fred 



Hirsch, Robert S. 



Hutchinson, J. D. 



Huff, Marvin L. 



Ide, Mrs. John Jay 



Irvin, Leslie L. 



Jablonski, Edward 



Jacobs, J. W. 



Jones, Mrs. L. Frances 



Jordan, Richard D. 



Kause, Selma 



Kerley, Robert V. 



Klingler, E. B. 



Koch, Mrs. Alfred S. 



Korn, Edward, A. 



Martin-Baker Co. Ltd. 



Martino, Joseph 



Massin, Alex 



Matt, Paul R. 



McCarthy, Charles J. 



McCay, Robert P. 



Moore, Robert L. 



Mongin, Alfred 



Morales, Donald K. 



National Aeronautic Association 



National Museum of Canada, National 



Aviation Museum 

 Nye, Willis L. 

 Page, George Jr. 

 Page, Mrs. Stanley 

 Peasley, Jesse C. 

 Robischon, E. W. 

 Sanger-Bredt, Frau Dr. Irene 

 Sayler, James 

 Shaw, Winthrop 

 Shepard, Alan B. Jr. 

 Shepard, Morton B. 

 Smith, W. E. 



Sperry-Rand Corp. Vickers, Inc. Div. 

 Stine, G. Harry 

 United Air Lines 

 U.S. Air Force 

 U.S. Air Force Museum 

 U.S. Library of Congress 

 U.S. National Bureau of Standards 

 U.S. National Aeronautics and Space 



Administration, Goddard Space 



Flight Center 

 U.S. Navy 



U.S. Navy, Office of Aviation History 

 Vaeth, J. Gordon 

 Van Dresser, Peter 

 Van Hoorebeeck, A. 

 Van Zandt, J. Parker 

 Velkas, C. Frank 

 Western Airlines 

 Westland Aircraft Limited 

 Wigton, D.C. 

 Wright, Mrs. Burdette 





National Armed Forces Museum 

 Advisory Board 



Colonel John H. Magruder III USMG, Director 



Recommendations regarding an alternate site plan for the National 

 * Armed Forces Museum Park were submitted to the Board of 

 Regents by the National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board 

 at its fifth annual meeting, January 11, 1 966. These had been de- 

 veloped as a result of opposition to the site plan submitted in January 

 1965, which proposed exclusive use of Fort Washington, Maryland. 

 Working in conjunction with the National Park Service and the staff 

 of the National Capital Planning Commission, the Advisory Board 

 devised a site plan entailing location of the major museum elements 

 in the so-termed Fort Foote-Smoot Bay area of Prince Georges County, 

 Maryland. Here would be sited the large majority of the outdoor 

 exhibits and reconstructions, the ship basin, and the combined visitor 

 center and exhibit building proposed in the Advisory Board's report 

 of January 12, 1965. Certain facilities at Fort Washington would be 

 shared by the National Park Service with the Smithsonian for develop- 

 ment as the coast defense exhibits of the Museum Park. 



The specific recommendations submitted by the Advisory Board on 

 January 24, 1966, were: 



1. The Smithsonian Institution seek legislative authority to acquire, 

 both by transfer from the National Park Service and by purchase, 

 such lands in the Fort Foote-Smoot Bay area of Prince Georges County, 

 Maryland, as are necessary for establishment of a National Armed 

 Forces Museum Park. 



269 




270 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



2. The Smithsonian Institution negotiated with the Department of 

 the Interior a joint use agreement permitting development of certain 

 facilities at Fort Washington, Maryland, viz., the old masonry fort, 

 Batteries Decatur and Many, and two supplemental water batteries, 

 as elements of the overall National Armed Forces Museum Park. 



Throughout the year the Board staff, in addition to implementing 

 the decisions of the Advisory Board with regard to site planning and 

 related matters, conducted negotiations with various agencies of the 

 Armed Forces and the General Services Administration with a view 

 to acquiring military and naval objects appropriate for the collections 

 of the proposed Museum Park. In consequence a large and varied 

 number of objects either were received during the year or were set 

 aside by owning agencies for retention and eventual transfer to the 

 Smithsonian. For example, there were acquired from the Depart- 

 ment of the Army numerous components of the ENIAG, the first 

 modern electronic digital computer, product of Army-sponsored 

 research during World War II; and from the Department of the Navy 

 the last operational Regulus II missile, complete with records chroni- 

 cling its noteworthy career as a fleet weapon and, subsequently, a 

 supersonic target drone. Designated for eventual transfer to the 

 Smithsonian by the Department of the Air Force and the U.S. Marine 

 Corps, respectively, were a mighty Titan I missile silo complete and 

 a unique collection of 20 tracked landing vehicles reflecting develop- 

 ments in the field of amphibious warfare from early in World War 

 II up to the middle 1950s. And from the General Services Adminis- 

 tration the Smithsonian acquired title to the sunken U.S.S. Tecumseh, 

 a monitor of the Ericcson type, lost in the battle of Mobile Bay, 

 August 5, 1864. 



In cooperation with the Smithsonian Library the staff continued to 

 acquire from Armed Forces historical agencies and elsewhere publica- 

 tions in the field of military and naval history both to serve the im- 

 mediate needs of staff members and to form the nucleus of the study 

 center library of the National Armed Forces Museum Park. 




Freer Gallery of Art 



John A. Pope, Director 



hphe gallery is concerned largely with the study of the civilizations 

 ■*• of the East and with the promotion of the highest ideals of beauty. 

 In accordance with the terms of the will of founder Charles Lang 

 Freer, these two very broadly phrased conditions serve as guidelines 

 for the work of all members of the staff. In general, each member of 

 the staff has pursued individual research projects, depending on his 

 specialty, in the fields of Chinese, Japanese, Indian, Persian, and 

 Arabic art. This work is carried on in the Gallery and in other 

 museums, libraries, and collections both in this country and abroad 

 In addition to these activities, staff members have been concerned 

 during the past year with the study of objects contemplated for pur- 

 chase and with the further study and cataloging of those objects which 

 have been added to the collection. Considerable time has also been 

 spent preparing reports on objects submitted for examination. 



The Freer Gallery received a number of grants during the year. 

 Among these was an important one from the Kevorkian Foundation, 

 to be used over a five-year period in assisting the library to expand its 

 Near Eastern holdings, and for the publication of the Gandhara frieze 

 (49.9). Another sizeable grant came from the JDR 3rd Fund, to be 

 used by Professor Yukio Yashiro, the recipient of the Freer Medal. 

 The National Geographic Society gave financial assistance to support 

 the publication of the IIC Abstracts; and an unrestricted gift was 

 received from Harold B. Cahn and Associates. The Felix and 

 Helen Juda Foundation and the Ellen Bayard Weedon Foundation 

 supported the purchase of important additions to the library. 



271 




272 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — HISTORY AND ART 



Staff Changes 



A great loss to the Freer Gallery was the death of Miss Katharine N. 

 Rhoades in New York on October 26th. Associated with the Gallery 

 from its beginning, she had been a close personal friend of the founder, 

 Charles Lang Freer, and had been instrumental in helping with the 

 cataloging of the collection. She was mentioned by Mr. Freer in his 

 will as a friend and advisor of the gallery and continued in active 

 service as honorary consultant until the time of her death. 



The Gallery regretfully accepted the resignation, July 1, 1965, of 

 Dr. James F. Cahill, curator of Chinese art, who is now with the 

 University of California at Berkeley. Dr. Cahill had first come to the 

 Gallery as a Hackney Scholar (American Oriental Society) in 1950 

 and studied in that capacity for approximately one year. In 1956 he 

 returned as a Freer Fellow from the University of Michigan for another 

 year, at the end of which time he became a regular staff member. 



The end of 1965 saw the retirement of Mrs. Lnor O. West, adminis- 

 trative assistant, after 20 years of service with the Freer. In June 

 Mrs. Constance B. Olsen resigned as librarian, and her place has been 

 filled by Mrs. Priscilla P. Smith. Mr. William Thomas Chase III, 

 assistant in the technical laboratory, resigned temporarily to return to 

 the Gallery in the fall of 1966. His place was filled for the summer 

 by Mrs. Meryl Johnson, chemist, from the University of Michigan. 



Two volunteer summer interns served during the summer of 1965: 

 Miss Barbara Bernhard (Oberlin College) and Miss Susan Lyles 

 (Mary Baldwin College). Miss Masako Saito of the Conservation 

 Center, Institute of Fine Arts, New York University, returned for 

 another period of three weeks to study Mr. Sugiura's methods of 

 restoring and mounting Oriental paintings. Miss Priscilla Parsons 

 completed several months of study during the summer of 1965 in the 

 Near Eastern field under a grant from New York University. In 

 October, Mrs. Ellen Johnston Laing of the University of Michigan 

 came to the Gallery as a Freer Fellow to do research in the field of 

 Chinese art in preparation of her doctoral thesis. In January and 

 February of 1 966, Miss Thea Comins, a student at Bennington College, 

 worked for Dr. Ettinghausen under the Smithsonian Institution's 

 academic year research assistance program. On May 12, 1966, Miss 

 Vicki Weinstein reported for duty as a Hackney Scholar from Cornell 

 University; and in June, Miss Mary Watkins (Mount Holyoke College) 

 and Miss Susan Frankel (Cornell University) reported for duty as 

 summer interns. 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 273 



The Collections 



The Freer Gallery of Art acquired a total of 36 objects during the 

 year, including two exceptional pieces of Persian metalwork: a Sasanian 

 silver and gilt bust of a king, probably Khosrow I, dated mid-6th 

 century (66.23), and a Parthian head of a lady (66.24); this latter is 

 approximately 2,000 years old The Japanese collection was enriched 

 by the purchase of several outstanding paintings: a pair of Namban 

 (foreigners) screens of the Momoyama period, 16th century, depicting 

 harbor scenes (65.22-23); a landscape screen by the artist Sesson 

 (1504-1589), from the Ashikaga period (66.3); a pair of hanging 

 scrolls, the Ryokai Mandara, early Buddhist paintings of the late Fujiwara 

 or early Kamakura periods (66.4-5) ; and a pair of handscrolls entitled 

 Kobo Daishi £aito, or Life of the Priest Kobo, of the Kamakura period 

 (66.9-10). To the Indian section was added a very fine bronze, a 

 shrine of Vishnu, dating to the Pala dynasty, 11th/ 12th century 

 (66.15). 



Other purchases consisted of: 



BRONZE 



Chinese, Han, 3rd/2nd century B.C.; vase with tall, cylindrical neck; 



incised decoration. (66.14) 

 Japanese, Kamakura, 13th century; Suibyo — water pot, seated lion on 



cover. (65.26) 



LACQUER 



Chinese, Ming, 15th century (early); round covered box, red lacquer 

 carved in relief; chH-lin and peonies; three-character inscription; 



Tang mao tsao. (65.25) 



METALWORK 



Persian, Sasanian, early 4th century; silver and gilt bottle with repousse 



reliefs of Dionysiac figures separated by fluted columns topped by 



bird figures. (65.20) 

 Persian, Sasanian, 4th century; silver and gilt bottle with repousse 



reliefs of musicians and dancers, each with a child; Pehlevi inscription. 



(66.1) 

 Persian, Sasanian, 3rd-7th century; gold necklace of biconical beads 



of twisted wire and disc-shaped beads of granulated fretwork; square 



pendant. (66.6) 

 Persian, Seljuk, 12th century; gold necklace of openwork elements 



made of twisted wire and small grains. (66.7) 

 Persian, Seljuk, 12th century; gold necklace of wire and granulation 



work, some beads inlaid with turquoise. (66.8) 




274 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



PAINTING 



Chinese, Ch'ing, 18th century, by Ch'en Mai; figures in a wooded 



landscape. (65.24) 

 Indian, Deccani, early 17th century, Bijapur; barefoot warrior with 

 round shield and straight-bladed sword. (65.21) 

 Indian, Mughal, mid- 17th century; shepherd with goat, in a stylized 



landscape. (66.22) 

 Japanese, Edo, Ukiyoe, by Kaigetsud5 Ando, early 18th century; 



figure of a courtesan. (66.2) 

 Japanese, Ashikaga, Muromachi Suiboku, att. to Sekkyakushi (14th/ 



15th century); boy on a water bufl'alo. (66.16) 

 Japanese, Edo, early 17th century, Tosa School; Tsuru no Monogalari 



(Tale of the Crane), handscroll. (66.18) 

 Persian, Isfahan (1082 H./A.D. 1672), by Mum Mosawvir; line 



drawing of monkey riding on a lion. (66.13) 



POTTERY 



Egyptian, Fatimid, llth-12th century; white glazed bowl with red 



luster design of leaves and arabesques. (66.26) 

 Japanese, Momoyama, Seto ware, Sobokai; reddish brown stoneware 



jar, four loops on shoulder; Sobokai tsukaru incised on base. (66.17) 

 Japanese, Edo, 17th century, Kutani ware; porcelain dish decorated 



with overglaze enamels in yellow on green, with blackish-brown 



diaper patterns. (66.19) 

 Persian, Transoxania or eastern Iran, 10th century, Afrasiyab ware 



(so-called); small platter with black and brown floral designs, Kufic 



inscription. (65.27) 

 Persian, Kashan, early 13th century; deep bowl with radial pattern of 



Naskhl writing, floral designs, and birds in cobalt blue and black on 



white. (65.28) 

 Persian, Samarra ware, 9th century; grayish bowl with originally 



white glaze and design of blue. (66. 1 1) 

 Persian, Kashan, early 13th century; vase with 8-sided body, decorated 



with leafy scrolls, plants and fishes in black under bluish glaze; 



iridescent. (66.20) 

 Persian, Nishapur, 10th century; deep bowl with luster design of pea- 

 cock holding fish in its beak. (66.27) 

 Turkish, Iznik ware III, 17th century; square tile with design of two 



parrots; blue, green and red on white. (66.12) 

 Turkish, Iznik ware III, 16th century; plate with central leaf and floral 



design on coral red ground. (66.21) 




Third presentation of the Freer Medal, September 15, 1965. Professor Yukio 

 Yashiro receives Medal from Smithsonian Secretary S. Dillon Ripley. 

 Seated left: Freer Gallery of Art Director John A. Pope. 



Princess Margaret, accompanied by Director John A. Pope and Secretary 

 S. Dillon Ripley, as she signs Freer Gallery guest book November 18, 1965. 




Left: Silver bust. Persian metalwork. 

 Parthian, 1st century B.C.- 1st cen- 

 tury A.D. (?). 66.24, Freer Gal- 

 lery of Art. 



Below: Silver and gilt bust of a king, 

 probably Khosrow I. Persian metal - 

 work, Sasanian, mid-6th century. 

 66.23, Freer Gallery of Art. 




Shrine of Vishnu. Indian bronze, Pala dynasty, 11th/ 12th 

 century. 66.15, Freer Gallery of Art. 





FREER GALLERY OF ART 275 



Turkish, Iznik ware III, 16th century; plate with floral design around 

 central cypress tree; blue, green, red and black on white ground. 

 (66.25) 



Library 



During the year, 2 1 9 items were incorporated by purchase, exchange, 

 and gift into the library collection, which has been well used, both by 

 the staff" and by a total of 577 university students and other scholars 

 doing reference work, including casual visitors wanting less scholarly 

 material on the objects displayed in the galleries. In addition, over 500 

 photographs were added to the study files, and the slide collection has 

 been greatly expanded with the acquisition of 2,263 slides. 



The Ellen Bayard Weedon Foundation made it possible to purchase, 

 in addition to other titles, the following outstanding books: 

 Cadiare, L., L'art a Hue (Hanoi, ca. 1920). 

 Ecke, G., Chinese painting in the Honolulu Academy of Arts and in private collections 



(Honolulu, 1965). 

 Shang-hai po-wu-kuan ts'ang cli ing-tung-chi (Shanghai, 1964). 



Care of Collections 



Care of the works of art was shared by several of the staff members. 

 The technical laboratory examined, cleaned and/or repaired, as 

 necessary, a total of 27 objects and made 75 identifications by X-ray 

 diffraction analysis, etc.; in addition, 48 objects were examined which 

 were either contemplated for purchase or had been submitted for 

 authentication by other museums or private owners. Ben B. Johnson, 

 consultant on conservation work, under contract to the Gallery, 

 examined and worked on 61 oil paintings in the American collections. 

 Takashi Sugiura, with the help of two trainees (his daughter Kumi 

 and Makoto Souta, who has been brought from Japan to serve his 

 apprenticeship under Mr. Sugiura), cleaned, retouched and remounted 

 a total of 19 Chinese and Japanese paintings. Illustrator Frank A. 

 Haentschke rematted 43 Arabic, Indian and Persian paintings. 



All the necessary equipment for the 204 exhibition changes 

 made during the year was provided by the cabinet shop under the 

 direction of superintendent Russell C. Mielke, who also maintained the 

 building in the usual immaculate and sound condition, and supervised 

 completion of the new storage facilities for the Oriental paintings. 



Curatorial Activities 



Director John A. Pope carried on extensive research on the ancient 

 Chinese bronzes in the collection, in collaboration with Rutherford 




276 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



J. Gettens head of the Freer technical laboratory, and other scholars, 

 toward the publication of this material in the revision and enlargement 

 of the Gallery's Catalogue of Chinese Bronzes (1946). A large part of 

 this was carried on in conjunction with the technical laboratory, and 

 is reported on page 278. He has also continued his research in the 

 fields of Chinese and Japanese ceramics; in conjunction with this, he 

 is at present on an extended journey which is taking him to several 

 European countries, the Near East, India, Taiwan, and Japan. 



During the year, he gave the following lectures: 

 "Chinese Porcelains in Early America," at George Washington 

 University and at a meeting of the Trustees of the Frick Collection, 

 New York City. 



"Ancient Chinese Bronzes in the Freer Gallery of Art," at a 

 meeting of the Society of Non-Destructive Testing in New York City. 

 "Art Collectors and Collections in Old China," at the University 

 of Michigan and at the Cosmos Club. 



"A Miracle of Rare Device," at Asia House Gallery, New York 

 City. 



Assistant Director Harold P. Stern continued research on Japanese 

 Ukiyoe and Tamatoe paintings, including the study of numerous paint- 

 ings of these schools while conducting a tour of the Archives of American 

 Art (a group of 106 members) through the Far East. The group 

 received briefing lectures in addition to being guided through such 

 centers of Oriental art as Tokyo and Kyoto in Japan, Hong Kong, 

 Thailand, and Taiwan. 



In January, he assisted in the planning and presenting of the Sym- 

 posium on Japanese Art held in connection with the Japanese Govern- 

 ment's loan exhibition, "Art Treasures from Japan." At the same 

 time, in conjunction with photographer Raymond A. Schwartz of 

 the Freer Gallery of Art, Stern arranged and carried out the complete 

 photographing and documentation of the objects in this exhibition, 

 making slides (approximately 40,000) available through the Freer 

 Gallery to other museums and educational institutions. 



He continued serving in the honorary posts and duties assumed in 

 previous years, and he supplied the introductory comments for two 

 shows in the Washington area: the exhibition of works by Uinichi 

 Hiratsuka at the Museum of Modern Art, and the exhibition of Con- 

 temporary Japanese Prints at the Cleveland Park Library, both 

 sponsored by the Washington Print Club. 



During the year, Stern gave the following lectures: 

 "Characteristics of Japanese Art," at the opening of the Japanese 

 Government's loan exhibition at the Los Angeles County Museum of 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 277 



Art and also at the Detroit Institute of Art and the Philadelphia 

 Museum of Art when the exhibition was being held at those institutions. 



"Narrative and Genre Aspects of Japanese Art," at the symposium 

 held at the Detroit Institute of Art during the exhibition of treasures 

 from Japan and also at the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto when 

 the exhibition was held there. 



"Japanese Narrative Handscroll Painting," at the annual dinner 

 of the Smithsonian Institution's Regents. 



"Popular Painting of Tokugawa Japan," at the Andrew Dickson 

 White Museum of Art, Cornell University. 



Richard Ettinghausen, head curator of Near Eastern Art, engaged in 

 exploratory research at historical and archaeological sites in Turkey 

 during the summer of 1965, and subsequent research in libraries and 

 museums in that country and in Europe. This work was preparatory 

 to writing a history of Turkish art from the late 12th to the 17th 

 centuries, the text to be published by A. Skira in Geneva under the 

 title, Art Treasures from Turkey. 



He continued research on early Indo-Muslim painting of the Sul- 

 tanate period, and made background studies for new acquisitions by 

 the Gallery. In addition to his previously held honorary posts, he 

 became a member of the Advisory Board of the Near Eastern Art 

 Research Center, Inc., New York; a member of the Sub-Committee 

 on Finds, American Research Center in Egypt, Inc. ; and a correspond- 

 ing member of the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, Paris. 

 During the year, he gave the following lectures: 



"Prayer Rugs," for the Rug Society of Washington, D.C. 



"Iranian Art in the Islamic Period: Tradition and Changes," at 

 the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. 



"Persian Miniatures and Drawings," for the Graphic Arts Council 

 of the Los Angeles County Museum. 



"God, Man and Nature in Islam," at the University of Penn- 

 sylvania. 



"Art and Architecture of Islam," at Harvard University. 



"Dionysiac Motives in Persian Art," at the Institute of Fine Arts of 

 New York University, Columbia University, and at Pennsylvania 

 State University. 



"The Constant Elements in Persian Art," at the J. B. Speed 

 Museum in Louisville, Kentucky. 



"Old and New Teheran," at the Iranian Embassy for a group of 

 students from George Washington University. 



"An Introduction to Persian Art," for the International Council of 

 Women in the United States at the Junior Museum of the Metro- 

 politan Museum of Art. 



230^157—66—23 




278 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — HISTORY AND ART 



"7,000 Years of Persian Art," at Pennsylvania State University. 



"Famous Iranian Cities" and "Iranian Art," for the Peace Corps 

 School for International Training at Brattleboro, Vermont. 



"Persian Miniatures," for the Municipal Art Society of Baltimore 

 City. 



"Art Treasures from Turkey," for the Congressional Club at the 

 National Gallery of Art. 



During the year, the work of the technical laboratory, under 

 Rutherford J. Gettens, was largely devoted to the study of Chinese cere- 

 monial bronzes in preparation for the forthcoming publication on 

 that subject. This was the culmination of many years of research in 

 this field. All the scientific techniques available have been used: 

 microscopy, metalography, spectrographic and wet-chemical analysis, 

 analysis by X-ray diffraction, plus the study of the objects by ultra- 

 violet light and, in some cases, by radiography. The purpose of this 

 research has been to find out everything possible about the physical 

 and chemical properties of the alloys and about the methods by which 

 the vessels were made. 



Head curator Gettens also continued his studies on corrosion products 

 of ancient metal objects and his study of Japanese pigments, particularly 

 a modern type — a form of glass matrix in which pigment particles are 

 embedded; this latter project will aid in the identification of Japanese 

 forgeries. With the issuance of volume 5, number 4, of HC Abstracts 

 Gettens relinquished editorship of this publication, which hereafter 

 will be edited at the new office of the Conservation Center of the 

 Institute of Fine Arts, New York University. 

 During the year, he gave the following lectures: 



"Joining Methods in the Fabrication of Ancient Chinese Bronze 

 Ceremonial Vessels," at the William Young Symposium held by the 

 Boston Museum of Fine Arts, at Asia House for the Chinese Art Society 

 of New York, and at the Fourth National (International) Sculpture 

 Casting Conference, University of Kansas. 



"Some Observations of the Techniques Employed in the Fabrica- 

 tion of Ancient Chinese Bronze Ceremonial Vessels," at the conference 

 last named above. 



"Microscopy at the Freer Gallery of Art," at the New York 

 Microscopical Society at the American Museum of Natural History. 

 Associate curator of Chinese art William B. Trousdale continued 

 research on his studies of Chinese jade and archaic bronze weapons. 

 In March, he joined with the University of Michigan's archaeological 

 excavations and survey of sites in Syria and Afghanistan, a project that 

 is expected to keep him in the field for a period of approximately five 

 months. 




FREER GALLERY OF ART 279 



Publications 



"James McNeill Whistler, A Biographical Outline Illustrated from 

 the Collections of the Freer Gallery of Art," by the late Burns A. Stubbs 

 {Freer Gallery of Art Occasional Papers, vol. 1, no. 4, July 9, 1965), was 

 revised and reprinted. Considerable time was given to the prepara- 

 tion of volume 6 of Ars Orientalis and to the first two volumes of the 

 Catalogue of Chinese Ceremonial Bronzes, now in publication; the latter 

 supersedes and enlarges upon the Freer Gallery "Descriptive and Illustra- 

 tive Catalogue of Chinese Bronzes Acquired During the Administration of 

 John Ellerton Lodge," by J. E. Lodge, A. G. Wenley, and J. A. Pope 

 (1946). 



Publications by staff members were as follows: 



Ettinghausen, Richard. "In Honor of Rudolf Berliner, April 14th, 

 1966, on the Occasion of His Eightieth Birthday," in Rudolf 

 Berliner: Bibliographic. Munich, 1966, pp. 11-14. 



. "The Islamic Period," in Art Treasures of Turkey, Circulated 



by the Smithsonian Institution, 1966-1968. Washington: Smith- 

 sonian Institution, 1966, pp. 47-66. 



Trousdale, William. [Review of] Fouilles d'Amri, by Jean-Marie 

 Casal (Publications de la Commission des Fouilles Archeologiques, 

 Fouilles de Pakistan), American Journal of Archaeology, vol. 70, 1966, 

 p. 75. 



Public Services 



The total number of visitors to the Gallery, which was open to the 

 public from 9:00 to 4:30 every day except Christmas Day, was 222,322, 

 an increase of more than 11,000 over that of the previous year. The 

 highest monthly attendance, in August, was 38,235. Of the total, 

 2,853 came to see staff members, to submit objects for examination, to 

 study in the library, or to see objects in storage. In all, 8,152 objects 

 and 2,362 photographs were examined, and 655 Oriental language 

 inscriptions were translated for outside individuals and institutions. 

 Docent service in the exhibition galleries was given by staff members, 

 to 35 groups totaling 628 persons, and in the storage rooms to 7 

 groups totaling 73 persons; in addition, 457 individuals were also 

 shown objects in storage. Among the visitors were 224 distinguished 

 foreign scholars or persons holding official positions in their own 

 countries, who came here to study museum administration and prac- 

 tices in this country. 



On September 15, 1965, ceremonies were held for the presentation 

 of the Charles Lang Freer Medal to Professor Yukio Yashiro, "for 

 distinguished contribution to the knowledge and understanding of 




280 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Oriental civilizations as reflected in their arts." The presentation was 

 made by Secretary Ripley, and Dr. Pope spoke on the career of 

 Professor Yashiro, one of the world's outstanding specialists in the arts 

 of the Far East and also an authority on the Italian painter Sandro 

 Botticelli and his school. The recipient in his speech of acceptance 

 commented on Mr. Freer and American pioneer collectors in the 

 field of Oriental art. In particular, he stressed Mr. Freer's early 

 association with Japan. Professor Yashiro's address was followed by 

 a reception. 

 The series of illustrated lectures was continued as follows: 



"Dionysiac Motives in Iranian Art," Dr. Richard Ettinghausen 

 Freer Gallery of Art (October 12, 1965). 



"Chinese Painting and Abstract Art," Professor Martie W. Young, 

 Cornell University (November 9, 1965). 



"Portraiture in Japan," Professor John Rosenfield, Harvard Uni- 

 versity (January 11, 1966). 



"Decoration and Monumentality in the Momoyama," Father 

 Harrie A. Vanderstappen, University of Chicago (February 8, 1966). 



"Taoist Wall Painting and the Chinese Tradition," Laurence 

 Sickman, William Rockhill Nelson Gallery of Art (March 22, 1966). 



"Art and Archaeology in South Arabia," Dr. Gus W. Van Beek, 

 Smithsonian Institution, Division of Cultural Anthropology (April 19, 

 1966). 



The auditorium was used by 1 3 outside organizations for 30 meetings, 

 with a total attendance of 4, 187. 



The photographic laboratory made a total of 15,164 items during 

 year, including negatives, photographs, color slides, color sheet films, 

 and polaroid prints; these included both Freer Gallery objects and 

 objects submitted from other sources. 



At the sales desk, 110,768 items were sold, comprising 5,821 publi- 

 cations and 104,947 reproductions (including postcards, slides, photo- 

 graphs, reproductions in the round, etc.). 



These figures indicate an increase of approximately 50 percent in the 

 work of both the photographic laboratory and the sales desk over that 

 of previous years. 




National Collection of Fine Arts 



David W. Scott, Director 



Significant progress toward fulfillment of its goals and mission 

 has been made during the year by the National Collection of Fine 

 Arts. These were formulated in the legislation of May 17, 1938, that 

 instructed the NCFA "to encourage the development of contemporary 

 art and to effect the widest distribution and cultivation in the matters 

 of such art" and in the subsequent architectural program that advised 

 the bureau "to consider its province to be the cultural life of the 

 community all over the United States and ... its obligation to be the 

 encouragement of a high standard of quality among artists in the fields 

 of both the fine and practical arts." 



As the move into new quarters in the renovated Patent Office build- 

 ing approaches, accelerated growth toward a full-scale museum opera- 

 tion becomes imperative. Among the activities toward this end, made 

 possible by an increased budget, are intensive review and refinement of 

 plans for the new quarters; enlargement of the collections and their 

 documentation and restoration; expansion and specialization of library 

 services; improvement in the quality and diversity of exhibitions; and 

 a great increase in public services offered, in the form of seminars, lec- 

 tures, films, and publications. 



Most gratifying has been the success of exhibitions and other national 

 services in meeting recognized needs and achieving the highest pro- 

 fessional standards. Public appreciation and awareness of the Collec- 



281 




282 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



tion's goals and purposes have been evidenced not only by widespread 

 interest but also by increased donations of works of art, contributions 

 of funds for purchases of art works and developmental activity, and 

 offers of support for the program generally. 



The dynamic growth of the National Collection of Fine Arts has 

 prompted requests for the bureau to undertake further projects. In 

 addition to the task of creating in the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries 

 (the old Patent Office building) a representative survey of American 

 art, a second gallery project is being developed as the NCFA formulates 

 a program for the old Court of Claims building (the original Corcoran 

 Gallery) now assigned to the Smithsonian Institution and conceived 

 as a gallery of art and design. The Patent Office and Court of Claims 

 planning involves both architectural and operational considerations. 

 Other program proposals are being developed, including assistance 

 for the Cooper Union Museum, and art exhibits for the John F. 

 Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Community and educational 

 exhibit proposals inaugurated early in the fiscal year unfortunately 

 were interrupted by the resignation of curator of education George V. 

 Gallenkamp in April 1966. 



Other events of the year included the transfer of the Smithsonian 

 Institution Traveling Exhibition Service to the U.S. National Museum 

 and the retirement of Thomas M. Beggs, former NCFA director and 

 recently special assistant to the Secretary for fine arts. 



Increased selectivity in the planning of the year's program of 1 1 

 exhibitions was demonstrated not only by the high quality of objects 

 exhibited but by the balance in choice of subject matter: six exhibitions 

 (five of major dimension) were drawn from American art — two from 

 the most immediately contemporary art of our country and four his- 

 torically oriented; and five presented the arts of other nations — again, 

 of both past and present periods. Of all these, five were created by 

 NCFA staff members. 



Elsewhere, the NCFA enjoyed the felicitous cooperation of other 

 segments of the art world. The Knoedler Galleries in New York 

 City held a mid-winter benefit exhibition for the NCFA of the work of 

 American artist Mary Cassatt, and for the first time in many years 

 substantial private support was received, which will allow for the 

 purchase of works of art and for other developmental activity. The 

 IBM Gallery, next door to Knoedler's, presented an exhibition of 

 miniatures in the collection, and generously donated leaflets on the 

 NCFA and its miniatures. 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 283 



Staff Changes 



In November 1965, the staff was augmented by the "detail" to the 

 NCFA of the International Art Section of the USIA, under the super- 

 vision of Miss Lois Bingham. The NCFA assumed responsibility for 

 U.S. representation in the international art exhibits at Sao Paulo and 

 Venice with the conviction that it must demonstrate our country's 

 concern for cultural values and its continuing major achievements in 

 the arts. 



Other additions to the staff included Farnham Blair, museum tech- 

 nician; Susan Bratley, museum curator; Ruth Carlson, librarian 

 (cataloging); John Latham, assistant for special services; and Lynne 

 Kolarsey, assistant to the registrar. 



Smithsonian Art Commission 



A special meeting of the Executive Committee of the Smithsonian 

 Art Commission was held on November 10, 1965, to review works 

 offered since the 42nd annual meeting in December 1964, and the 

 43rd annual meeting of the Commission was held in Washington on 

 Tuesday, December 7, 1965. 



Recommendations were made for the reappointment of Wilmarth S. 

 Lewis, Henry P. Mcllhenny, Paul Mellon and Ogden M. Pleissner for 

 the usual 4-year term. The following officers were re-elected: Edgar 

 P. Richardson, Chairman; Gilmore D. Clarke, Vice-Chairman; and 

 S. Dillon Ripley, Secretary. The following were re-elected to the Execu- 

 tive Committee: David E. Finley, Chairman, Mr. Clarke, Mr. Pleissner, 

 Mr. Mcllhenny, Mr. Richardson (ex officio) and Mr. Ripley (ex 

 officio). 



Commission members reviewed works submitted and recommended 

 the acceptance or rejection of those works as part of the Collection. 

 These items are reported under Accessions. 



A special meeting of the Executive Committee was called on January 

 20, 1966, to consider recommendations concerning NCFA needs, and 

 it was the sense of the Committee that an ad hoc committee should 

 be set up to help meet these needs. 



The death of Paul Manship on January 30, 1966, ended this great 

 artist's long and fruitful association with the National Collection and 

 the Smithsonian. Mr. Manship had been a member of the Smithsonian 

 Art Commission since 1931, serving as Chairman from 1944 to 1964. 

 To this service, he brought great warmth and goodwill and he donated 

 to the Collection many excellent examples of his work. By the terms of 




284 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



his will, the approximately 500 pieces of sculpture and drawings that 

 remained in his studios were to be divided between the National 

 Collection and the St. Paul Art Center. These institutions are presently 

 planning a memorial exhibition to be held during the later summer and 

 fall of 1966. 



The Collections 



Among the important gifts to the Collection during the year were 

 43 pieces of sculpture by Paul Manship given by the artist shortly 

 before his death. In addition, the Collection was enriched by his 

 magnificant bequest of 102 pieces of sculpture, 200 drawings and 

 sketches, and 1 painting. Excluding the Manship objects, which 

 will be reported in the next annual report, 390 works were received 

 into the collections. Most noteworthy was the group of 105 works 

 (paintings, watercolors, drawings, and graphics) executed under the 

 Works Progress Administration during the 1930's, transferred from 

 the National Park Service, U. S. Department of the Interior. Among 

 this group are studies for murals by Reginald Marsh and William 

 Gropper, and paintings by Millard Sheets, Peter Blume, and Eugene 

 Higgins. 



Important individual works received included a painting, Cotopaxi, 

 dated 1855, by the Hudson Piver painter Frederic Edwin Church, 

 given by Mrs. Frank R. McCoy; The Hills, by Preston Dickinson, 

 given by Mrs. Robert F. Shawan; Phenomena Off From Shore, by Paul 

 Jenkins, given by the artist; and a watercolor, Outdoor Cafe, by Maurice 

 Prendergast, given by Dr. R. A. Kling. 



Purchases included an oil study for a large work, never executed, 

 entitled The Vision, by the Hudson River painter Thomas Cole; 

 Mountain Lake, Near Piedmont, Maryland, by the mid- 19th century 

 painter William E. Sonntag, and a small Landscape by the Japanese- 

 born American artist Yasuo Kuniyoshi. 



A total of 1 ,900 works were loaned to the NCFA by 1 1 7 lenders. 

 These included 543 weather vane molds loaned by Mrs. Edith Halpert, 

 and 1 70 20th-century paintings and drawings loaned by Mr. Olin Dows. 

 Of the 1 ,900 works, 1 ,030 were for lending programs, including items for 

 display in the White House. 



The NCFA lent to museums and educational institutions throughout 

 the United States 360 paintings from its collections. An exhibition 

 of 158 of its most important miniatures was held at the International 

 Business Machines Corporation in New York City. The Wadsworth 

 Atheneum exhibited 1 1 1 Catlin paintings in a George Catlin exhibition 

 in Hartford. And 510 works were lent to offices of the Federal Govern- 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 285 



ment, including 144 within the Smithsonian Institution and 127 

 to the White House. 



Sixty-five paintings belonging to the National Collection were trans- 

 ferred to the National Portrait Gallery. The 24th Street staging 

 area was organized to accommodate approximately 2,000 objects 

 in the NCFA collections for storage, repair, and study prior to their 

 removal to the new quarters in the old Patent Office building; and 

 67 paintings and 2 works of sculpture were restored. In connection 

 with the NCFA's concern for government-owned art and for gathering 

 archival material, a survey was initiated on the study and documenta- 

 tion of public sculpture existing in the District of Columbia. Washing- 

 ton sculptor Bruce Moore served as consultant. 



Additions to the library, a facility which in the new building will be 

 shared with the National Portrait Gallery, have come by the exchange 

 distribution of catalogs issued by the NCFA and by gifts. Of the 

 many received since July 1 965, only a few of the donors can be men- 

 tioned here: Mr. Richard Dannenberg, Director of the American 

 Contemporary Art Gallery, New York; Mrs. Daphne Foskett, Edin- 

 burgh, Scotland; Mr. David C. Huntington, of Olana Preservation, 

 Inc., New York; Mr. Alexander Ince, New York; the Freer Gallery 

 Library; Mr. Andrew Oliver, New York; the Embassy of the Ruman- 

 ian People's Republic, Washington, D.C. ; Mrs. John Sloan and Mr. 

 Charles Nagel, Washington, D.C. 



Important collections of books and papers were also received from the 

 American Federation of Arts, New York; the Bollingen Foundation, 

 New York; the Corcoran Gallery, Washington; Mrs. Anthony de 

 Francisci, New York; Mrs. Edith Halpert, New York; the Martha 

 Jackson Gallery, New York; Mrs. Haven Parker, Boston; the Tate 

 Gallery, London; and others. The NCFA is grateful for this very 

 necessary support of the library collections. 



Exhibitions 



During the past year, the number of exhibitions was reduced (11 

 against 19 of the previous year), and their size and duration extended. 

 Greatly increased effort was put into selection and presentation in order 

 to provide exhibitions of national and international significance. 



George Catliri's Indian Gallery (July 19 through September 19, 1965). 

 The Smithsonian Institution's collection of Catlin's paintings of the 

 American Indian is unique and world-famous. This exhibition was 

 the first occasion in over 50 years that the entire collection of more 

 than 400 paintings and prints was on public view, exhibition mounted 




286 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — HISTORY AND ART 



in a setting and manner approximating Catlin's own gallery of the 

 mid- 19th century. 



Treasures From the Plantin-Moretus Museum (July 24 through August 1 5, 

 1965). This small exhibition of fine 16th- and 17th-century printing 

 and printing equipment from the Plantin-Moretus press of Amster- 

 dam was circulated by the Smithsonian Institution Traveling 

 Exhibition Service. 



American Prints of the Sixties (September 4 through September 26, 1 965) . 

 In a less comprehensive form, this was initially organized by NCFA 

 for a special July 4th showing at the Department of State. 



The Preservation of Abu Simbel (September 11 through October 17, 1965). 

 Comprised of photographs and a model showing the ancient monu- 

 ments to be disastrously affected by Egypt's High Aswan Dam 

 project. 



Romanian Tapestries (October 14 through November 14, 1965). The 

 exhibition was presented by NCFA in cooperation with the U.S. 

 Department of State cultural exchange program; 51 tapestries and 

 14 ceramics, all contemporary, were shown. It was the first showing 

 in the U.S. of Romania's recently revitalized art of tapestry. 



Roots of Abstract Art in America: 1910-1930 (December 2, 1965 through 

 January 9, 1966). Paintings and sculpture by 41 artists were 

 assembled to give a broad view of the formative period of con- 

 temporary abstract art in this country. 



United States Exhibition, VIII Sao Paulo Bienal (January 27 through 

 March 6, 1966). The work of seven of our most progressive artists 

 represented the U.S. in the eighth biennial exhibit held in Sao Paulo, 

 Brazil, one of the two great international forums of contemporary 

 art. Reassembly of this exhibit at the Smithsonian marked the first 

 home presentation within recent years of the American section. 

 In conjunction with this exhibition lectures were given by Henry 

 Geldzahler, associate curator of American painting and sculpture, 

 Metropolitan Museum of Art, on "Current Abstraction and its 

 Sources," and by Lawrence Alloway, curator of the Guggenheim 

 Museum, on "Barnett Newman." 



Frederic Edwin Church (February 10 through March 13, 1966). Frederic 

 Church is one of those 19th century American artists who is included 

 in textbooks but otherwise generally ignored. This exhibition, 

 which included almost all of his major paintings and a large number 

 of sketches, provided the first thorough survey of his work and the 

 perspective from which to evaluate it. Organized by the NCFA, 

 the exhibition was subsequently shown at the Albany Institute of 




Atlantic Liner in Harbor with Tug (study for mural), by Reginald Marsh (Ameri- 

 can 1898-1954). Tempera on masonite, 18 X 23 inches. Transfer from 

 National Park Service. 1965.8.102 NCFA. 



Entrance to Church exhibition in Foyer Gallery. Draperies and bronze 

 sculptures were brought from Church's home "Olana," and the arch is a 

 near duplication of the entrance to its great hall. 




la 



3 





— 



fn 





<j 



< £ 





United States exhibition of contemporary American Negro artists, organized 

 by International Art Program of NCFA for the First World Festival of 

 Negro Arts at the Palais de Justice, Dakar, Senegal. 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 287 



History and Art and at M. Knoedler and Company in New York 

 City. 

 American Landscape: A Changing Frontier (April 28 through June 19, 

 1966). Organized by NCFA in commemoration of the fiftieth 

 anniversary of the U.S. National Park Service, this exhibition 

 showed the pursuit of unspoiled nature by our artists from the 18th 

 through the 20th centuries. 



In connection with this exhibition, a series of six lectures on U. S. 

 parks was given by officials of the National Park Service. 

 Ancient Art From Afghanistan — Treasures of the Kabul Museum (June 30 

 through August 23, 1966). Opportunity to exhibit antiquities of 

 high aesthetic quality and from a little known culture is rare. The 

 NCFA was fortunate to be one of the three museums permitted to 

 offer this exceptional artistic event in America. In conjunction with 

 the exhibition, M. Karim Barakzai of the Kabul Museum spent 

 several weeks in Washington as guest curator. 

 Rugs of Afghanistan (June 30 through July 31, 1966). This exhibition 

 of 34 examples of weaving by the nomadic tribes of Afghanistan 

 presented as a complement to the showing of the ancient treasures of 

 that country, was arranged through the courtesy of Mr. H. McCoy 

 Jones. 



In addition to the special exhibitions in New York City mentioned 

 above, the NCFA presented or assisted with the following special 

 exhibitions in the Washington, D.C., area: OP and the Abstract, print 

 show, in the East Wing of the White House; The Image, contemporary 

 American prints, in the East Wing of the White House; Indiana Artists 

 of Today, the first exhibition in the Senate Caucus Room; Modern 

 American Painting, an Art-in-the-Embassies exhibit at the National 

 Collection; Oil Reportage by J. S. Churchill, in the National Collection; 

 and Georgia Artists, the first art exhibition in the House of Representa- 

 tives Caucus Room. 



International Art Program 



The International Art Program, formerly a part of the United States 

 Information Agency, joined the National Collection of Fine Arts in 

 November 1965. Under the NCFA, the mission of the International 

 Art Program (IAP) has remained the same — to plan, assemble, and 

 send overseas exhibits of American art, and it continues to work with 

 the overseas posts of the USIA in setting up itineraries for its exhibits. 



The biggest and most important project during the reporting period 

 was the organizing of the American representation at the xxxm Venice 

 Biennale. After the works were selected by U.S. Commissioner Henry 




288 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Geldzahler, the IAP coordinated the assembling, packing and shipping 

 of the works and the production of the catalog. NCFA staff members 

 oversaw the installation in Venice and participated in the multifarious 

 activities of the opening week. 



Another large exhibition, that of contemporary American Negro 

 artists, was prepared for the First World Festival of Negro Art in Dakar, 

 Senegal. Ten artists were represented and one of them, William 

 Majors, won first prize in graphics. The President of the Republic of 

 Senegal complimented the American exhibit and was especially pleased 

 with the catalog. 



Other shows prepared and circulated by IAP during the period 

 included seven different contemporary print exhibitions showing the 

 various aspects of graphic arts in the U.S. today; a retrospective show 

 of Stuart Davis' work for Paris, Berlin and London; two shows of 

 American Indian art; four craft shows (one of contemporary textiles, 

 one of Appalachian folk art, and two of general contemporary crafts) ; 

 and a selection of 16 paintings by contemporary New York artists for 

 showing in Latin America. These exhibits were, in most cases, 

 sponsored overseas by the U.S. Information Service, which was re- 

 sponsible for local exhibition costs, such as the preparation of catalogs 

 and internal shipping. 



The USIA continued to provide financial assistance to the IAP during 

 this period for projects begun before the transfer to the Smithsonian 

 was effected. On July 1, 1966, the National Collection of Fine Arts is 

 to assume full responsibility for this program. 



Special Projects and Events 



During the past year, at the request of and with the assistance of the 

 Economic Development Administration, it engaged Charles Counts, a 

 nationally recognized craftsman-designer from Georgia, as crafts 

 consultant to evaluate specific crafts projects that had been submitted 

 to the EDA. He also made a four months' survey and wrote a report 

 which considered the economic and design problems of contemporary 

 crafts, along with guidelines for the evaluation of craft project proposals. 

 This report, "Encouraging American Handicrafts: What Role in 

 Economic Development?" published by the EDA, provides a basis for 

 further studies and activities in support of American handicrafts. 



The Art-in-the-Embassies Program continues to grow under the 

 supervision of Mrs. Nancy P. Kefauver, and the NCFA serves as a 

 repository for the over 1,376 works of art involved. These works are 

 registered and cared for in new storage facilities and shipped by the 

 State Department to American Embassies in all parts of the world. 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 289 



The White House Changing Exhibitions Program continues to 

 grow with over 300 works of art involved, changing on a rotating basis 

 every six to eight months. The program is a means by which the 

 President can directly encourage American art of today. Each work of 

 art on loan to the White House offices is accompanied by a letter with 

 biographical information about the artist. The works of art, displayed 

 individually or in small changing exhibits, hang in the East and West 

 Wing halls, offices and reception areas, as well as in the Executive 

 Office building. 



The first annual White House Fellows' Seminar on American Art, a 

 series of six informal lectures, was developed especially for the White 

 House Fellows, members of the White House Staff, and the Cabinet. 

 This survey of American art, with emphasis on the period since 1900, 

 was presented by NCFA staff members and guest speakers Lloyd Good- 

 rich, Director of the Whitney Museum of American Art, and Edgar P. 

 Richardson, Director of the Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur 

 Museum. 



Staff Activities 



Director David W. Scott represented the Smithsonian Institution 

 and the NCFA at the Venice Biennale. He served on the Decorative 

 Arts Committee of the American Federation of Arts, as well as on the 

 Executive Council of the Art-in-the-Embassies Program. He also 

 served as advisor to the Fine Arts panel of the National Council on the 

 Arts, and on the Fine Arts Committee of the D.C. Recreation Board. 

 He lectured to the NCFA White House Fellows' Seminar on various 

 aspects of American Art and on the Landscape Show, and before the 

 Art Association of Indianapolis on "The Arts in the Great Society." 

 In Atlanta, Georgia, he juried the crafts section of the Arts Festival of 

 Atlanta. 



Richard P. Wunder, curator of painting and sculpture, represented 

 the U.S. Government at a 5-day conference held at UNESCO head- 

 quarters in Paris concerning long-term loans between museums of 

 different nations and the reconstitution of dismembered works of art. 

 Also during the year he assisted in matters pertaining to the Cooper 

 Union Museum. He served as Director of the Drawing Society, and he 

 represented the NCFA at the openings of the Church exhibition at 

 Albany and New York City. He also assembled an exhibition of 50 

 17th- and 18th-century drawings to be exhibited during the forth- 

 coming year at the National Gallery of Art, and subsequently to be 

 circulated by the American Federation of Arts. 



230-457 — 66 24 




290 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Harry Lowe, curator of exhibits, served as Vice Commissioner at the 

 United States Pavilion of the xxxm biennial international art 

 exhibition in Venice, Italy. He delivered two lectures and partici- 

 pated in the seminar discussion on exhibits and installation design at 

 the National Trust for Historic Preservation Seminar for Historical 

 Administrators in Williamsburg, Virginia, and he lectured at the 

 White House Fellows' Seminar. He also served on the panel of three 

 judges for the Third Annual Art Exhibit of the National Association of 

 Industrial Artists, Inc. In an advisory capacity, he attended the 

 Conference on Arts and Humanities in the Southeastern Region held at 

 the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. 



Donald McClelland, assistant to the director, lectured at the Chicago 

 Institute of Art; at St. Alban's School and at the Taft School; for the 

 Regents of the Smithsonian Institution; for the D.C. Chapter of the 

 D.A.R.; for "Operation Headstart" at the D.C. Public Auditorium; 

 at the White House Fellows' Seminar; and he presented a series of 9 

 lectures for the Heights School, D.C. In other activities, he juried 

 1 1 exhibitions, among which were the National Armed Forces show 

 in Washington, the Petersburg (Virginia) Arts Festival, Fairfax County 

 Art Association, and the Plains (Virginia) Art Exhibition. 



Stefan P. Munsing, special consultant, organized a Jasper Johns 

 drawing show (to coincide with the presentation of the Drawing 

 Society National Exhibition in September 1966). He supervised 

 arrangements for the presentation of several films: "The Ivory Knife" 

 (color film on the artist Paul Jenkins, with music by Irwin Bazelon), 

 "Henry Moore, London, 1940-42," "Five British Sculptors Work and 

 Talk," and "Sculpture by Lipton." He also lectured at the White 

 House Fellows' Seminar and served as advisor to the Archives of 

 American Art 7th airlift tour to Eastern and Western Europe, recom- 

 mending the itinerary of museums, gallaries, and private collections. 



Special consultant Adelyn D. Breeskin sent a representative group 

 of American contemporary prints to New Delhi for the International 

 Exhibition held at the All India Institute of Arts and Crafts; helped 

 choose exhibition material for the Edinburgh (Scotland) Fesitval; art 

 for an exhibition of Old Lyme painters shown at the Institute of 

 Contemporary Arts; and material for the Mary Cassatt exhibition at 

 Knoedler Galleries, New York. She gave two lectures in the White 

 House Fellows' Seminar on American Art. She lectured to the U.S. 

 Foreign Service Officers, to members of the Jewish Educational 

 Alliance of New York City, the National Council of Jewish Women, 

 to the "Friends of Pakistan," to a group in Lincoln, Nebraska, to the 

 Smithsonian Associates, and to the White House Fellows' Seminar, 

 and she assisted in a symposium for the Washington Print Club. She 




NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 291 



juried the Library of Congress Biennial Print Show; the Annual Art 

 Exhibition in Birmingham, Alabama; a United Nations exhibition; 

 the 16th Mid- America Annual Exhibit in Kansas City; and served as 

 one-man jury for the annual exhibition in Huntington, West Virginia. 

 She pursued her research for compiling a catalogue raisonne of the 

 paintings, pastels, watercolors and drawings of Mary Cassatt. This 

 took her in June to Europe, where she lectured in Munich and did 

 research on Cassatt in several countries. Mrs. Breeskin received 

 honorary degrees from Hood College, Frederick, Maryland, and 

 Morgan State College, Baltimore, Maryland. 



Librarian William Walker was actively engaged in a project with the 

 Library of Congress subject cataloging division to revise the Library of 

 Congress "N" classification schedule for books on the fine arts. Moti- 

 vation for the undertaking was primarily the benefit of this library, but 

 it is believed by the Library of Congress staff that the proposed changes 

 and improvements submitted by Walker will, if published, be of value 

 to all art libraries using this classification system, including the Library 

 of Congress itself. 



He was principally engaged in developing a strong library facility 

 to serve the NCFA, while radically expanding that aspect supporting 

 the National Portrait Gallery, which will share use of the facility in the 

 new building. In anticipation of increased space and library use 

 in the new quarters next year and reduced accessibility to the Smith- 

 sonian Library's main reference facilities now close by, concentration 

 has been on acquiring necessary reference works, including multi- 

 volume sets, such as encyclopedias, library catalogs, and serial indexes. 



John Latham, assistant for special services, joined the staff in October 

 to develop public service programs and to advise the art world and the 

 general public of the objectives, needs, and services of the NCFA. In 

 connection with this mission, he was in charge of public information 

 for the American Section in Venice before the opening of the Biennale 

 on June 18. 



This year an unprecedented number of university students and 

 internes were in attendance for 10- or 12- week periods. This amounted 

 to a great extension of the bureau's educational program. Ten 

 students or internes were at work during the year, not including 

 those of the 1 965 summer program. 



Among the conservators and consultants, in addition to those already 

 mentioned, who assisted the program were Joseph Andrews, Thomas 

 Carter, Sheldon Keck, Philip Vickers, Bruce Moore, and Marvin 

 C. Ross. Continuing support was provided by Bayard Underwood, 

 Harold Cross, Henri Courtais, Henry Heydenryk, Stewart Treviranus, 

 Janice Hines, Ben Johnson, Istvan Pfeiffer, and H. B. Colborn. 




292 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Publications 



Bolton-Smith, Robin. Miniatures in the National Collection of Fine Arts, 



Smithsonian Institution. New York: IBM Gallery, 1966. 

 Breeskin, Adelyn D. [Introduction to] Mary Cassatt. New York: 



Knoedler Galleries, 1966, 56 pp., 42 illustr. 

 . [Introduction to] Roots of Abstract Art in America, 1910-1930. 



Washington: Smithsonian Institution, publ. 4655, 1965, 93 pp., 



47 illustr. 

 — . Matisse in America. Harpers Bazaar (December 1965), 2 



pp., 1 illustr. 

 Lowe, Harry. [Introduction to] The Josephine and Phillip A. Bruno 



Collection. New York: Finch College Museum of Art, 1965. 

 Scott, David W. [Introduction to] American Landscape: A Changing 



Frontier. Washington: Smithsonian Institution, publ. 4671, 1966, 



42 pp. 

 . [Introduction to the Catalogue of the Exhibition] XXXIII 



International Biennial Exhibition of Art, Venice 1966, United States of 



America. October House, Inc., 1966. 

 . America's Role in the Biennale. Art Gallery (June 1966), 



vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 11-14. 



Wunder, Richard P. In Memoriam: Michel Nicholas Benisovich 

 (1891-1963) [includes bibliography, "The Art Historical Writings 

 of Michel N. Benisovich"]. Art Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 2, 1964 (pub- 

 lished 1965), pp. 196-199. 



. [Preface to] Frederic Edwin Church. Washington: Smithsonian 



Institution, publ. 4657, 1966. 




National Portrait Gallery 



Charles Nagel, Director 



Touring these first years of its existence — this is but its third 

 ■*-' annual report — the National Portrait Gallery has been in minimal 

 temporary quarters and might almost be said to have been a museum 

 in a filing case. The time, however, has been time well invested; the 

 Gallery has had the opportunity to gather its forces for two activities 

 that are of the utmost importance — to plan its future program and to 

 attend to its housekeeping. 



In order to plan, the Gallery had first to assemble the nucleus of a 

 staff. This has now been done; the growing staff can be regarded with 

 satisfaction and its work in planning for the future with hope and 

 confidence. 



As to housekeeping these months have made it possible to assure 

 that each portrait in the collection is looking its best, and is in the 

 best possible structural condition — matters too often neglected and 

 all too often misunderstood or ignored by the public. But when the 

 Gallery moves to its new quarters in the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries 

 (the old Patent Office building) the collection as a whole will have 

 received the expert care it deserves. With the air conditioning that 

 will be part of the equipment of the building, the work that has been 

 done may confidently be expected to last many a year. 



Renovation of the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries building was 

 about eighty percent completed in June 1 966, and as finish materials 

 begin to be applied, the building begins to reveal the character and 

 dignity that stamp it as a distinguished work of architecture of its 



293 




294 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



period. The move into new quarters early in 1967 is anticipated 

 eagerly, for it will permit the initiation, in greatly increased space, of 

 a more complete professional program for the National Portrait Gallery, 

 a program which will make it favorably known as the nation's repository 

 for whatever treasures of American portraiture may be available. 



The Collections 



A National Portrait Gallery is not, after all, just another art museum; 

 it is something new in America, a gallery devoted only to one thing: 

 the likenesses in all media of those who in every walk of life have made 

 a significant contribution to the development and culture of our country. 

 It is a museum whose first consideration is the sitter. In short, it is the 

 visual history museum for the Nation in terms of portraits of distin- 

 guished individual citizens. 



In the course of the year the Gallery added to its still small collection 

 102 accessions by transfer, gift, or purchase. For the transfers the 

 Gallery is beholden to the National Collection of Fine Arts, for the 

 gifts, to a variety of donors — institutional and individual, and from all 

 sections of the country. For the purchases, the Gallery is most grateful 

 that its funds for purchase, though limited, have given it che rare 

 privilege of selecting what seemed to be most important of the objects 

 that have come upon the market. 



Since these accessions are of the utmost importance to the Gallery, a 

 full list is appended. A brief discussion of some will give an idea of the 

 spread in time and the personality of the individuals represented. 



Paul Wayland Bartlett (1865-1925), a portrait by Charles Sprague 

 Pearce, came as a gift from Mrs. Armistead Peter, Jr. It shows Bartlett, 

 a Yankee born but trained as an artist in France, in full profile and in 

 the costume of the turn of the century. Among many other works he 

 is responsible for the sculptured pediments of the House of Representa- 

 tives. Bartlett was a handsome man and as a successful artist could 

 not help but know it. All this is honestly shown with such faithfulness 

 and conviction by his slightly older contemporary Charles Pearce that 

 it is one of the most popular portraits in the collection. It is a transfer 

 from NCFA. 



Mary Baker Eddy (1821-1910) by Luella V. Serrao. This fine 

 marble bust of the founder of the Christian Science Church was pre- 

 sented as a gift to the Gallery in May 1966 from Mrs. Frances Thompson 

 Hill and Calvin C. Hill on the occasion of the hundredth anniversary 

 of the founding of the church. 




NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 295 



Ulysses S. Grant (1822-1885), a portrait by Samuel B. Waugh, 

 was the gift of the International Business Machines Corporation. 

 Another transfer from NCFA, it is a bust portrait that shows, beyond the 

 rough force that is such a familiar aspect of Grant, a kind of sensitivity 

 that explains the honesty and integrity with which he met gallantly the 

 disasters of his later life. 



Michael Gratz (1740-1811), by William Edward West, is an ex- 

 cellent, unusually large, pastel portrait of the man who with his brother 

 Bernard did so much to support the American cause in the Revolution. 

 It was the gift of Richard N. Tetlie. 



Julia Ward Howe (1819-1910), a portrait by her son-in-law John 

 Elliott, was the gift of Mrs. John Elliott and was a transfer from 

 NCFA. It is of unusual interest as it shows Mrs. Howe as the young 

 woman who was inspired to write the "Battle Hymn of the Republic" 

 for which she received $4 from the Atlantic Monthly and the undying 

 devotion of her fellow Americans. 



John J. Pershing (1860-1948), a full length portrait by Douglas 

 Volk of the famous leader of the American troops in France is a transfer 

 from NCFA, and was originally presented by the National Art Com- 

 mittee, which was responsible for the recording of many outstanding 

 figures both civil and military associated with World War I. 



William Howard Taft (1957-1930), by Robert MacCameron, was 

 presented by the artist's son and daughter, Robert, Jr., and Marguerite 

 MacCameron. It is an unusually vigorous and convincing likeness, 

 taken at the height of his powers, of the only man to have been both 

 President and Chief Justice of the United States. 



John Bartram (1699-1777), by John Wollaston, purchased by the 

 Gallery. Bartram, the first great native American botanist, laid out 

 a botanic garden on the Schuylkill and began the first hybridizing 

 experiments in America. He was called by Linnaeus "the greatest 

 natural botanist in the world." 



Albert Einstein (1879-1955), by Joseph Scharl, purchased by the 

 Gallery. This portrait of one of the most noted of modern scientists, 

 is thoroughly contemporary in its approach. Yet, despite the abstract 

 expressionist manner in which it is executed, it is a thoroughly recog- 

 nizable likeness of Einstein by one of his close friends, and hence a 

 remarkably fine document of our own time. 



Edwin Forrest (1806-1872), by Edwin Agate, purchased in 

 memory of Alexander Sandor Ince from the gift made by the Kathryn 

 and Gilbert Miller Fund. This portrait of our earliest American-born 

 actor of first rank shows him in the Indian role of "Metamora" which 

 he made famous. 




296 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Alexander Hamilton (1755 or 57-1804) by Guiseppi Ceracchi, 

 purchased by the Gallery. A bust in white marble, one of the famous 

 portraits of Hamilton executed by this Italian sculptor. 



Gilbert Stuart (1755-1828), by an unknown painter, purchased 

 by the Gallery. This small portrait of one of America's earliest native 

 born painters is a fine likeness and a most valuable record. 



In addition to the funds appropriated by the Congress for the support 

 of the program of the National Portrait Gallery, gifts of SI 0,000 were 

 received from Kathryn and Gilbert Miller Fund and $5,000 from the 

 Kauders Foundation. A gift of two extremely handsome pieces of 

 furniture for the Gallery executive offices was made by Victor Proetz — 

 a tall book-case veneered in blond European elm and en suite a low 

 case for oversize volumes. Each of these pieces is one of a pair, the 

 other of which will eventually come to the Gallery. They set a standard 

 of style and distinction for whatever additional furniture is later 

 acquired. 



In honor of Einstein week, March 14 to 21, the portrait later purchased 

 for the collection and a drawing, both by Joseph Scharl, were placed 

 on exhibition along with several portrait photographs. On April 9, 

 the third anniversary of the conferring upon him of honorary United 

 States citizenship, the portrait of Sir Winston Churchill by Douglas 

 Chandor was put on exhibit. On April 28, a portrait of President 

 Calvin Coolidge by Joseph Burgess was presented by the Phi Gamma 

 Delta Fraternity and accepted for the permanent collection. On May 

 28th the portrait bust of Mary Baker Eddy, founder of the Christian 

 Science Church, by Luella Varney Serrao presented by Frances 

 Thompson Hill and the late Calvin C. Hill was placed on exhibition 

 on the occasion of the celebration of the one-hundredth anniversary 

 of the founding of Christian Science. 



Staff Activities 



Director Charles Nagel, worked with historian Daniel John Reed 

 and curator Robert G. Stewart on planning for the future of their 

 departments. He served as ex-officio member of the important 

 Acquisitions Committee, addressed the New England Conference of 

 the American Association of Museums in New Haven, and wrote 

 articles on the Gallery for Antiques Magazine and Chronique des Arts. 

 A most helpful outcome of his address in New Haven was an article on 

 the gallery by Russell Lynes in the June 1966 Harper's Magazine en- 

 titled "Public Faces" in which some of the difficulties and opportun- 

 ities of the gallery were delightfully set forth. 




John Bartram (1699-1 777), attributed to John Wollaston. Purchased through 



Museum fund. 




Julia Ward Howe (1819-1910), by her son-in-law John Elliott. Gift 

 Mrs. John Elliott (transfer from National Collection of Fine Arts). 



of 




Mary Baker Eddy (1821-1910), by Luella V. Serrao. Gift of Mrs. Frances 

 Thompson Hill, who stands beside the bust. 



Calvin Coolidge (1872-1933), by Joseph Burgess. Gift of the Phi Gamma 



Delta Fraternity. 




Bernard M. Baruch (1870-1965), by Douglas Chandor. 

 Gift of Mr. Baruch. 




NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 297 



He also worked with the architects, Faulkner, Stenhouse, Fryer, and 

 Faulkner and with Mr. Victor Proetz on the remodelling and fur- 

 nishing of the NPG quarters in the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries 

 building, and represented the Smithsonian Institution at various 

 meetings related to the International Cooperation Year. 



Early in the year Daniel John Reed, formerly assistant chief of the 

 manuscript division of the Library of Congress, assumed the duties of 

 historian in the gallery. Since his arrival he has devoted most of his 

 time to building up the library and the print collection and to planning 

 and inaugurating a research and publication program. Basic to any 

 program for the study of American portraiture is a national inventory 

 of portraits of citizens of historical significance ; this was started under 

 his direction. In it he was assisted by John Frazer, who has continued 

 to search the records of the Frick Art Reference Library in New York 

 for material to be included in what is to be called the Catalog of 

 American Portraits. Information in the catalog is being extensively 

 indexed and will be available to scholars and other galleries and 

 museums. 



Curator Robert G. Stewart, directed a two-pronged program of 

 conservation of the portraits in the collection and of research on their 

 history, authenticity and authorship. He has successfully reattributed 

 artists, has identified the artist or the subject, and, in some cases, has 

 obtained for the collection portraits brought in for examination. 

 In the course of this research, two portraits in the collection have 

 been proved entirely fictitious and a number have proved to be by 

 artists other than those to whom they had been assigned. 



Mr. Stewart arranged the Gallery's first exhibition "Nucleus for a 

 National Collection,'"opened in the Arts and Industries building for 

 the Bicentennial of James Smithson's birth. This exhibition of 65 

 portraits by 52 artists in painting, engraving, drawing, sculpture, and 

 photography, represented a cross section of the various media in the 

 collection. A catalogue of the exhibition, Nucleus for a National Collec- 

 tion (Washington: Smithsonian Institution, publ. 4653, 1966, unpaged 

 [30 pp.], illus.), was compiled by Mr. Stewart. 



Under the direction of Mrs. Genevieve A. Kennedy a program has 

 been instituted to photograph for the gallery's archival file all portraits 

 on loan or brought in for study. To date 200 black and white photo- 

 graphs and 46 color transparencies have been made. The print 

 collection of some 21,287 pieces has been alphabetized and biograph- 

 ically identified by Mrs. Kennedy, who was greatly assisted in this work 

 by student aides Richard L. Tyner and Joyce A. Keener. 



Librarian William Walker worked diligently with Dr. Reed in 

 building up the library, which in its new quarters will serve both the 




298 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



National Portrait Gallery and the National Collection of Fine Arts, and 

 every effort has been made to avoid duplication while making the 

 collection useful to both. Concentration has been on necessary refer- 

 ence works, including multi-volume sets such as encyclopedias, library 

 catalogues and serial indexes. 



Additions to the Collections 



Subject 

 *Abbot, Charles Greely 

 *Agassiz, Jean Louis 



Rodolphe 

 *Agassiz, Jean Louis 



Rodolphe 

 *Bartlett, Paul Wayland 

 Bartram, John 

 Baruch, Bernard M. 

 Benton, Thomas Hart 

 *Bliss, Tasker 

 Brookings, Robert 

 *Bryant, William Cullan 

 *Byrnes, James Francis 

 Carson, Rachel L. 

 Carver, George 

 Washington 



*Chase, Salmon P. 



Churchill, Winston S. 



Churchill, Winston S. 

 *Clay, Henry 



Clemens, Samuel L. 



(Mark Twain) 

 Compton, Arthur Holly 

 Coolidge, Calvin 



Corcoran, William 

 Wilson 

 *Crosby, John S. 

 Dahlgren, J. A. B. 



*Delafield, Richard 

 *Delano, Jane A. 



*DuPont, Samuel F. 



Eddy, Mary Baker 



*Edison, Thomas 

 Einstein, Albert 



Artist 

 John N. Brewer 

 W. Ingalls 



Louis Mayer 



Charles Sprague Pearce 

 John Wollaston 

 Douglas Chandor 

 Ferdinand T.L. Boyle 

 John C. Johansen 

 Janet Gregg Wallace 

 Henry Kirke Brown 

 Alfred Jonniaux 

 Una H anbury 

 Betsey Graves Reyneau 



James R. Lambdin 

 Bryant Baker 

 Douglas Chandor 

 Attributed to 



Rembrandt Peale 

 Eulabee Dix 



Janet Gregg Wallace 

 Joseph Burgess 



G. P. A. Healy 



Alfonse Jongers 

 "McC" after Joseph 



Cotton 

 Charles C. Curran 

 Bjorn Egeli 



Daniel Huntington 



Luella V. Serrao 



A. A. Anderson 

 Josef Scharl 



Donor or Fund 

 Nicholas R. Brewer 

 Unknown 



Unknown 



Mrs. Armistead Peter Jr. 

 Museum fund 

 Bernard M. Baruch 

 Museum fund 

 Anonymous Donor 

 Janet Gregg Wallace 

 H. K. Bush-Brown 

 Robert C. Vose Jr. 

 Museum fund 

 The George Washington 



Carver Memorial 



Committee 

 Anonymous Donor 

 Bryant Baker 

 Bernard M. Baruch 

 International Business 



Machines Corporation 

 Museum fund 



Janet Gregg Wallace 

 Fraternity of Phi Gamma 



Delta 

 Mrs. David E. Finley & 



Mrs. Eustis Emmit 

 Unknown 

 Mrs. J. V. Dahlgren 



Albert Delafield 



Jane A. Delano Post of 



American Legion 

 Mrs. May DuPont 



Saulsbury 

 Mrs. Francis Thompson 



Hill, Calvin C. Hill 

 Dr. Eleanor A. Campbell 

 Museum fund 




NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 



299 



Subject 

 *Ericsson, John 



*Ericsson, John 



*Espy, James Pollard 

 Evans, Robley D. 

 Forrest, Edwin 



Franklin, Benjamin 

 (2 portraits) 

 *Fuller, George 

 *Garfield, James A. 



Glover, Charles 

 *Grant, Ulysses 



Gratz, Michael 

 Hackett, James K. 



*Halsey, William F. 



Hamilton, Alexander 

 *Hammerstein I, Oscar 



Harding, Warren 



Gamaliel 

 *Hare, Robert 



Harriman, Averill 



Harris, Townsend 

 *Henderson, John Brooks 



Henderson, Mrs. John 



Brooks 

 *Henry, Joseph 

 *Hodgkins, Thomas G. 

 *Hooper, Reverend 



William 



"Hoover, Herbert 

 "Howe, Julia Ward 

 "Hull, Cordell 



"Kellogg, John Harvey 

 Kennedy, John 



Fitzgerald 

 Key, Phillip 



Artist 

 Arvid F. Nyholm 



A. Saint-Gaudens 



Thomas Sully 

 August Franzen 

 Edwin Agate 



Giovanni B. Nini 



Edward T. Billings 

 Ole P. H. Balling 



John McLure Hamilton 

 Samuel Waugh 



William West 

 Albert d'Andrea 



Albert K. Murry 



Guiseppi Ceracchi 

 Unknown 



*Hammerstein II, Oscar Abby Altson 



Margaret Lindsay 



Williams 

 Alvin Clark 

 Gilbert Early 

 Albert d'Andrea 

 J. J. Benjamin-Constant 



J.J. Benjamin- Constant 



W. Ingalls 

 Robert G. Hardie 

 After John Smibert 



Edmund Tarbell 

 John Elliott 

 Gregory C. Stapko 



Emil Fuchs 

 William Draper 



Donor or Fund 

 Swedish-American Re- 

 publican League of 

 Illinois 

 Georgiana Wills 



Sargent 

 The Espy Family 

 Horatio S. Rubens 

 Kathryn and Gilbert 



Miller fund 

 Museum fund 



Catherine Ames 

 International Business 



Machines Corporation 

 Charles C. Glover 

 International Business 



Machines Corporation 

 Richard N. Tetlie 

 The City College of 



New York 

 International Business 



Machines Corporation 

 Museum fund 

 Mrs. Oscar Hammerstein 



II 

 Mrs. Oscar Hammerstein 



II 

 Museum fund 



Unknown 



Gilbert Early 



City College of New York 



Heirs of Mrs. J. B. 

 Henderson 



Mrs. John Brooks 

 Henderson 



W. Ingalls 



Unknown 



Transfer from United 

 States National 

 Museum — G. Brown 

 Goode Collection 



National Art Committee 



Mrs. John Elliott 



International Business 

 Machines Corporation 



Dr. Edward Kellogg 



Museum fund 



Charles Willson Peale Charles van Ravenswaay 




300 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Subject 

 *King, Ernest J 



*Kinkaid, Thomas C 



*Lane, Franklin K. 

 *Lea, Isaac 

 Lee, Robert E. 

 *Lockwood, Belva Ann 



MacArthur, General 

 Douglas 

 *McClellan, George B. 



*McKean, Thomas 



McKinley, William 

 McNamara, Robert 

 Madison, Dolly 



*Mann, James R. 



*Mansfield, Richard 



Artist 

 Albert K. Murray 



Robert Sloan 



Ossip Perelma 

 Bernard Uhle 

 H. G. Matthews 

 Nellie M. Home 



Rodolphe Kiss 



Julian Scott 



Charles Willson Peale 



Charles A. Whipple 



Gilbert Early 



Unknown 



J. Gari Melchers 



Orlando Rouland 



*Marshall, George Catlett J. Anthony Wells 



"Maynard, Edward 

 Meyer, George von L. 



Morgan, John Pierpont 

 *Mitscher, Marc Andrew 



*Morrill, Justin Smith 

 Motley, John Lothrop 

 *Nimitz, Chester W. 



*Noyes, Frank B. 

 Osceola 



Pershing, John J. 

 *Pershing, John J. 

 *Polk, Frank L. 

 *Polk, James Knox 



*Ranger, Henry Ward 

 Read, Thomas Buchanan 

 Roberts, Robert Richford 



*Roosevelt, Franklin 

 Delano 



*Rush, Richard 

 Salk, Jonas Edward 



*Scott, Winfield 



George W. Maynard 

 Julian Story 



Adrian Lamb 

 Albert K. Murray 



Preston Powers 

 H. G. Matthews 

 Albert K. Murray 



Ossip Perelma 

 Lewis C. Gregg 



Moses W. D. Dykaar 

 Douglas Volk 

 John C. Johansen 

 Max Westfield 



Alphonse Jongers 

 H. A. Root 

 John Neagle 

 Henry S. Hubbell 



Thomas W. Wood 

 Edward Amateis 

 Henry Kirke Brown 



Donor or Fund 

 International Business 



Machines Corporation 

 International Business 



Machines Corporation 

 Frank B. Noyes 

 Mrs. Lea Hudson 

 Museum fund 

 Committee on Tribute to 



Belva A. Lockwood 

 Mrs. Elisha Gee Jr. 



Mrs. Georgiana L. 

 McClellan 



Mrs. Francis T. Redwood 

 (part of the George 

 Buchanan Coale Col- 

 lection, Baltimore) 



Mrs. Mary E. Kreig 



Gilbert Early 



Miss Eunice Chambers 



Mrs. James R. Mann 



H. H. Flager 



International Business 

 Machines Corporation 



Unknown 



Donna Julia Brambilla 

 and Mrs. Phillip O. 

 Coffin 



H. S. Morgan 



International Business 

 Machines Corporation 



Dr. Charles L. Swann 



Museum fund 



International Business 

 Machines Corporation 



Ossip Perelma 



Mrs. Lewis C. Gregg, 

 Miss Emma Gregg 



Estate of George Owen 



National Art Committee 



Anonymous Donor 



James Knox Polk 



Memorial Foundation 



James E. Fraser 



Miss Eunice Chambers 



Museum fund 



Henry S. Hubbell 



Unknown 

 Edward Amateis 

 H. K. Bush-Brown 




NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 



301 



Subject 

 *Seward, William H. 

 Sheridan, Philip 

 *Sherman, William T. 

 *Signing of the Treaty of 



Versailles 

 *Sims, William S. 

 *Smithson, James 

 *Stanton, Edward 



McMasters 

 Stuart, Gilbert 

 Taft, William Howard 



Torbert, Alfred T. A. 



Washington, George 

 *West, Benjamin 

 *White, Henry 

 *Woodrow Wilson 



Woodrow Wilson 

 *Woodrow Wilson 



Artist 

 Giovanni Benzoni 

 Thomas B. Read 

 G. P. A. Healy 

 John C. Johansen 



Irving Wiles 

 Hattie Burdette 

 Henry Ulke 



Unknown 



Robert McCameron 



Mathew Brady 

 Joseph Hiller 

 Frank Wilkins 

 John C. Johansen 

 John C. Johansen 

 Bryant Baker 

 Edmund Tarbell 



Donor or Fund 

 Mrs. Sara Carr Upton 

 Benjamin Bell 

 Tecumseh Sherman 

 National Art Committee 



National Art Committee 



Unknown 



Miss Sofie Stanton 



Museum fund 



Robert MacCameron Jr., 



Marguerite 



MacCameron 

 Dorothy B. Webb 

 Unknov/n 

 Mrs. Mabel Wiles 

 Anonymous Donor 

 Anonymous Donor 

 Bryant Baker 

 Anonymous Donor 



*Portraits marked with an asterisk are transfers from the National Collection 

 of fine Arts. 



230-^57—66- 



-25 





National Gallery of Art 



John Walker, Director 



Sir : I have the honor to submit, on behalf of the Board of Trustees, the 

 29th annual report of the National Gallery of Art for the fiscal year 

 ended June 30, 1 966. This report is made pursuant to the provisions 

 of section 5(d) of Public Resolution No. 14, 75th Congress, 1st session, 

 approved March 24, 1937 (50 Stat. 51), U.S. Code, title 20, sec. 75(d). 



Organization 



The National Gallery of Art, although technically established as a 

 bureau of the Smithsonian Institution, is an autonomous and separately 

 administered organization and is governed by its own Board of Trustees. 

 The statutory members of such Board of Trustees are the Chief Justice 

 of the United States, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treas- 

 ury, and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, ex officio. The 

 four General Trustees continuing in office during the fiscal year ended 

 June 30, 1 966, were Paul Mellon, John Hay Whitney, Dr. Franklin D. 

 Murphy, and Lessing J. Rosenwald. On May 5, 1966, Paul Mellon 

 was reelected by the Board of Trustees to serve as President of the 

 Gallery, and John Hay Whitney was reelected Vice President. 



The executive officers of the Gallery as of June 30, 1 966, were as 

 follows: 



Chief Justice of the United States, Earl Warren, Chairman. 



Paul Mellon, President. 



Ernest R. Feidler, Secretary-Treasurer. 



303 




304 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



John Walker, Director. 

 E. James Adams, Administrator. 

 Ernest R. Feidler, General Counsel. 

 Perry B. Cott, Chief Curator. 

 J. Carter Brown, Assistant Director. 

 The three standing committees of the Board, as constituted at the 

 annual meeting on May 5, 1966, were as follows: 



EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



Chief Justice of the United States, Earl Warren, Chairman. 



Paul Mellon, Vice Chairman. 



Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, S. Dillon Ripley. 



John Hay Whitney. 



Dr. Franklin D. Murphy. 



FINANCE COMMITTEE 



Secretary of the Treasury, Henry H. Fowler, Chairman. 

 Paul Mellon. 



Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, S. Dillon Ripley. 

 John Hay Whitney. 



ACQUISITIONS COMMITTEE 



Paul Mellon, Chairman. 

 John Hay Whitney. 

 Lessing J. Rosenwald. 

 Dr. Franklin D. Murphy. 

 John Walker. 



Personnel 



At the close of fiscal year 1966, full-time Government employees on 

 the permanent staff of the National Gallery of Art numbered 314. 

 The United States Civil Sendee regulations govern the appointment of 

 employees paid from appropriated funds. 



Appropriations 



For the fiscal year ended June 30, 1966, the Congress of the United 

 States, in the regular annual appropriation, and in a supplemental 

 appropriation required for pay increases, provided $2,531,000 to be 

 used for salaries and expenses in the operation and upkeep of the 

 National Gallery of Art, the protection and care of works of art acquired 

 by the Board of Trustees, and all administrative expenses incident 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 305 



thereto, as authorized by the basic statute establishing the National 

 Gallery of Art, that is, the Public Resolution No. 14, 75th Congress, 

 1st session, approved March 24, 1937 (50 Stat. 51), U.S. Code, title 

 20, sees. 71-75. 

 The following obligations were incurred: 



Personnel Compensation and Benefits $2, 214, 400. 00 



All other Items 315, 669. 1 1 



Total Obligations 2, 530, 069. 1 1 



Attendance 



Visitors to the Gallery during fiscal year 1966 were 1,577,108, an 

 increase of 324,006 over the 1965 attendance. From July 1 through 

 Labor Day, 1965, and April 1 through June 30, 1966, the Gallery was 

 open to the public from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. on weekdays and from noon 

 to 10 p.m. on Sundays. For the remainder of the year the Gallery 

 was open to the public every day save Christmas and New Year's Day 

 on a schedule of 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekdays and 2 to 10 p.m. on 

 Sundays. Visitors during the additional hours in the summer of 1965 

 and the spring of 1966 numbered 154,911. The average daily attend- 

 ance for year was 4,345. 



Accessions 



There were 2,835 accessions by the National Gallery of Art as gifts, 

 loans, or deposits during the fiscal year. This represents an increase of 

 1,113 accessions over those of fiscal 1965. 



Gifts 



Three hundred and fifty-one paintings by George Catlin were 

 received as a gift from Paul Mellon. In addition, the following works 

 of art were received as gifts or bequests accepted by the Board of 

 Trustees or were purchased pursuant to action by the Board of Trustees 

 from funds given or bequeathed: 



PAINTINGS 



Donor Artist Title 



Avalon Foundation, Church Morning in the Tropics 



New York, N.Y. 



Copley Eleazer Tyng 




306 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



paintings — continued 



Harry Waldron Have- 



meyer and Horace 



Havemeyer, Jr. 

 National Gallery of Art, 



Ailsa Mellon Bruce 



Fund 



National Gallery of Art, 

 Adolph Caspar Miller 

 Fund 




Saint George and the Dragon, by Rogier van der Weyden (Flemish, 1399/1400- 

 1464). Wood, 6 X 4 5 / 8 inches. Ailsa Mellon Bruce Fund. National 

 Gallery of Art. 




The Wife of Hasdrubal and Her Children, by Ercole Roberti (Ferrarese, c. 1456- 



1496). Wood, 

 Gallery of Art. 



18}£ X 12 inches. Ailsa Mellon Bruce Fund. National 




Portrait of a Man, by Corneille de 

 Lyon (French, active 1534- 

 1574). Wood, 6% X 5% 

 inches. Ailsa Mellon Bruce 

 Fund. National Gallery of 

 Art. 



Daniel in the Lions' Den, by Peter 

 Paul Rubens (Flemish, 1577- 

 1640). Canvas, 88# X 130>S 

 inches. Ailsa Mellon Bruce 

 Fund. National Gallery of 

 Art. 



* ■ 




I 



Saskia Lying in Bed, by Rembrandt van Ryn (Dutch, 1606-1669). Pen and 

 brush drawing, about 1638. Ailsa Mellon Bruce Fund. National Gallery 

 of Art. 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 



307 



Donor 

 William Benton, New 



York, N.Y. 

 Chester Dale 



Mrs. Snowden A. 



Fahnestock, Washimg- 



ton, D.C. 

 National Gallery of Art, 



Ailsa Mellon Bruce 



Fund 



GRAPHIC ARTS 



Artist 

 Reginald 

 Marsh 

 Bellows 

 Lurcat 

 Drian 

 Leger 



Title 

 Merry-Go-Round 



Three Pencil Sketches 

 Maud Dale 

 Maud Dale 

 Hands and Foot 

 Fragonard La Voile des Armours 



Master of Satyrs with a Bacchante 

 1515 



Rembrandt Saskia Lying in Bed 



WORKS OF ART ON LOAN 



The following works of art were received on loan, or were continued 

 on loan, by the Gallery: 



Artist 

 Rembrandt 



Donor 

 The Fuller Foundation, 



Boston, Mass. 

 Jerome Hill, New York, 



N.Y. 



Mr. and Mrs. Paul 

 Mellon, Upperville, 

 Virginia 



Private Collection 



55 



The Norton Simon 

 Foundation, Los 

 Angeles, Calif. 



Delacroix 



Desras 



Stubbs 



55 



Various 

 French 

 Artists 

 Raphael 

 Veronese 



Title 



Portrait of a Man in a 



Fur-lined Coat 

 The Arab Tax 



Lion Devouring a Goat 

 14 Wax Sculptures 



Lion Attacking a Deer 

 Lion Attacking a Horse 

 68 Paintings 



The Madonna of Loreto 

 Self-Portrait 

 Rembrandt Portrait of the Artist's 

 Son Titus 




308 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



WORKS OF ART ON LOAN RETURNED 



The following works of art on loan were returned during the fiscal 

 year: 



To Artist Title 



The Fuller Foundation, Rembrandt Portrait of a Man in a 



Boston, Mass. Fur-lined Goat 



Colonel and Mrs. Edgar S. J. 



W. Garbisch, New York, Johnson 



N.Y. 



Picking Grapes in an 

 Orchard 



National Collection of 

 Fine Arts, Smithsonian 

 Institution 



Private Collection 



55 



The Putnam Foundation, 

 San Diego, Calif. 



Christus 



The Death of the Virgin 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 



309 



To 



The Putnam Foundation, 

 San Diego, Calif. 



The Norton Simon 

 Foundation, Los 

 Angeles, Calif. 



J. H. Whittemore Com- 

 pany, Naugatuck, Conn. 



WORKS OF ART LENT 



The following loans were made during the fiscal year: 



To 

 Connecticut Historical 

 Society, Hartford, Conn. 



Museum of Early Amer- 

 ican Folk Art, New 

 York, N.Y. 



Metropolitan Museum of 

 Art, New York, N.Y., 

 and Museum of Fine 

 Arts, Boston, Mass. 



Copley 



Gallery of Modern Art, 

 New York, N.Y. 



Munson-Williams Proc- 

 tor Institute, Utica, N.Y. 



Hassam 

 Quid or 



Eleazer Tyng 



Sir Robert Graham 

 The Red Cross Knight 

 Jane Browne 

 The Death of the Earl 



of Chatham 

 Epes Sargent 

 The Copley Family 

 Watson and the Shark 

 Allies Day, May 1917 



The Return of Rip Van 

 Winkle 




310 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — HISTORY AND ART 



works of art lent — continued 



Art Galleries 

 University Art Museum, 

 Austin, Texas 



Inness 



Other Gifts 



The Lackawanna Valley 



In the fiscal year 1966 gifts of money were made by the Avalon 

 Foundation, Frelinghuysen Foundation, J. I. Foundation, Samuel H. 

 Kress Foundation, Old Dominion Foundation, Eugene and Agnes E. 

 Meyer Foundation, Lila Acheson Wallace Fund, Inc., and Mr. Paul 

 Mellon. 



Mrs. Ailsa Mellon Bruce contributed additional money and securities 

 for the purchase of works of art for the National Gallery of Art and for 

 educational purposes related to works of art. 



Exhibitions 



The following exhibitions were held at the National Gallery of Art 

 during the fiscal year 1966: 



The Chester Dale Bequest. Continued from previous year. 



Graphic Arts from the Chester Dale Collection. Continued from the previous 



year through August 1 8, 1 965. 

 Exhibition Illustrating Richard Bales' Index of American Design Suite No. 4. 



Continued from previous year through August 6, 1965. 

 Rembrandt's Portrait of the Artist's Son Titus, on loan from the Norton 



Simon Foundation. Continued from previous year through December 



5, 1965. 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 311 



Sketches by Constable from the Victoria and Albert Museum. Continued from 



the preceding year through July 5, 1 965. 

 White House Festival of Arts Exhibition. Continued from previous year 



through July 11, 1965. 

 19th and 20th Century European Drawings. July 1 1 through August 29, 



1965. 

 19th and 20th Century Prints. August 6 through November 4, 1 965. 

 British Mezzotints from the 18th and Early 19th Centuries. September 18 



through October 31,1 965. 

 John Singleton Copley: A Retrospective Exhibition. September 19 through 



October 31, 1965. 

 Treasures of Peruvian Gold. October 14 through November 28, 1965. 

 Christmas Prints. November 5, 1 965 through January 1 2, 1 966. 

 Durer and His Time. November 14 through December 12, 1965. 

 Modern French Prints from the Rosenwald Collection. December 11, 1965 



through March 9, 1966. 

 Fifteenth-Century Woodcuts and Metalcuts from the Collection of the National 



Gallery of Art. December 19, 1965 through January 30, 1966. 

 Bruegel Prints from the Rosenwald Collection. January 13 through March 8, 



1966. 

 French 18th Century Prints from the Widener Collection. March 9 through 



July 1, 1966. 

 Etchings by Rembrandt in the Collection of the National Gallery of Art. March 



11 until after July 1, 1966. 

 Drawings from the Collection of the National Gallery of Art. February 5 



through April 17, 1966. 

 French Paintings from the Collections of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon and 



Mrs. Mellon Bruce. March 17 through May 1, 1966. 

 Twenty-five Tears of National Gallery Publications. March 17 through 



May 1, 1966. 

 Art Treasures of Turkey, June 5 through July 17, 1966. 



Exhibitions of recent accessions: The W^ife of Hasdrubal and Her Chil- 

 dren by Ercole Roberti, Elizabeth Throckmorton by Largilliere, and 

 Portrait of a Man by Corneille de Lyon from August 10, 1965, through 

 October 25, 1965; The Marquise de Peze and the Marquise de Rouget with 

 Her Two Children by Vigee-Lebrun from November 9, 1965, through 

 January 12, 1966; Daniel in the Lions' Den by Rubens from January 12, 

 1966; St. George and the Dragon by Rogier van der Weyden from May 6, 

 1966; and A Lady Writing by Vermeer from May 20, 1966. 




312 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Graphic Arts 



Graphic Arts from the National Gallery of Art collections were in- 

 cluded in 8 traveling exhibitions, and special loans were made to 32 

 museums, universities, schools, and art centers in the United States and 

 abroad. There were 235 visitors to the Graphic Arts Study Room. 



The material in the Index of American Design was used during the 

 year by 304 persons. Their interests included securing slides and 

 exhibits, doing special research and designing, and gathering illustra- 

 tions for publications. 



Curatorial Activities 



Under the direction of chief curator Perry B. Cott, the curatorial 

 department accessioned 377 gifts to the Gallery during the fiscal year 

 1966. Advice was given with respect to 1,669 works of art brought to 

 the Gallery for expert opinion, and 36 visits to collections were made by 

 members of the staff in connection with offers of gifts. The registrar's 

 office issued 220 permits to copy and 118 permits to photograph 

 works of art in the Gallery's collections, About 6,771 inquiries, many 

 of them requiring research, were answered verbally and by letter. 



Assistant chief curator William P. Campbell served as a member of 

 the Special Fine Arts Committee of the Department of State and as 

 judge of a YWCA exhibition of the work of Washington artists. 



Curator of painting H. Lester Cooke continued as consultant to 

 NASA with duties of organizing and supervising artists doing paintings 

 relating to the Space Program. He also acted as judge for exhibitons 

 of the Atlanta Southern States, 1965; Peoria, Illinois, Mid- West Area, 

 1966; Richmond, Virginia Area; and for four local exhibitions. 



Museum curator Michael Mahoney acted as judge for the Internal 

 Revenue Service Art Exhibition, September 1965. 



Assistant registrar Diane Russell taught a course on North European 

 medieval art at The American University in the 1966 spring term. 



The Richter Archives received and catalogued 621 photographs on 

 exchange from museums here and abroad; 902 photographs were pur- 

 chased and about 200 reproductions have been added to the Richter 

 Archives. Five hundred photographs have been added to the Icon- 

 ographic Index. 



Restoration 



Francis Sullivan, resident restorer of the Gallery, made regular and 

 systematic inspection of all National Gallery of Art works of art in 

 Washington. He relined, cleaned, and restored 9 paintings and gave 




A Lady Writing, by Jan Vermeer (Dutch, 1632-1675). Canvas, 17% X 15% 

 inches. Gift of Harry Waldron Havemeyer and Horace Havemeyer, Jr., 

 in memory of their father Horace Havemeyer. National Gallery of Art. 



230-457—66- 



-26 




The Marquise de Peze and the Marquise de Rouget with Her Two Children, by Elisabeth 

 Vigee-Lebrun (French, 1755-1842). Canvas, 48% X 61% inches. Gift 

 of the Bay Foundation in memory of Josephine Bay Paul and Ambassador 

 Charles Ulrick Bay. National Gallery of Art. 




Eleazer Tyng, by John Singleton Copley (American, 1738-1815). Canvas, 

 49% X 40}£ inches. Gift of the Avalon Foundation. National Gallery of 

 Art. 





NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 313 



special treatment to 32. Twenty-three paintings were X-rayed as an 

 aid in research. He continued experiments with synthetic materials as 

 suggested by the National Gallery of Art Fellowship at the Mellon 

 Institute of Industrial Research, Pittsburgh, Pa. Technical advice 

 was given in response to 220 telephone inquiries. Special treatment 

 was given to works of art belonging to Government agencies, including 

 the Capitol, Treasury Department, the White House, the Coast Guard 

 Academy, and the Freer Gallery of Art. 



Publications 



La Galeria National de Washington by H. Lester Cooke was published 

 by the Aquilar Press, Madrid. Mr. Campbell wrote an introduction 

 to a new edition of Dunlap's History of the Rise and Progress of the Arts of 

 Design in the United States. Miss Katharine Shepard wrote two reviews 

 for the American Journal of Archaeology. An article written by 

 Michael Mahoney entitled "Salvator Rosa Provenance Studies: 

 Prince Livio Odescalchi and Queen Christina" was published in 

 Master Drawings, III, 4, 1966. 



The catalogue Fifteenth-Century Woodcuts and Metalcuts from the 

 Collection of the National Gallery of Art was prepared by Richard S. Field. 

 This will constitute part of the definitive catalogue of the Gallery's 

 collections. 



The curatorial staff prepared for publication the Summary Catalogue 

 of European Paintings and Sculpture. 



Publications Service 



During the fiscal year 1966, the Publications Service, under the 

 supervision of Mrs. Ruth Dundas, placed on sale seven new publica- 

 tions: La Galeria National de Washington (in Spanish) by H. Lester 

 Cooke; National Gallery of Art Summary Catalogue of European Paintings 

 and Sculpture; A Pageant of Painting from the National Gallery of Art, edited 

 by Huntington Cairns and John Walker; Dutch Landscape Painting of 

 the 17th Century by Wolfgang Stechow; John Singleton Copley by Jules D. 

 Prown; Renaissance Bronzes by John Pope-Hennessy; and The Smith- 

 sonian Institution by Walter Karp. 



Over 300 new subjects in 2"x 2" original color slides were added 

 to the items sold to the public, and a slide catalogue, listing 427 sub- 

 jects, was published. 



For the first time black and white gravure prints, ll"xl4" size, 

 were made from the Gallery's graphic arts collection. Eight subjects 

 were produced in this form. Six new subjects in \\"x\A" color 




314 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — HISTORY AND ART 



reproductions were published to make a total of 284 now available to 

 the public, and 15 new subjects were published in color postcards for 

 a total of 239. Twelve new large color reproductions were published 

 with Gallery assistance. 



Educational Program 



From June through December 1 965 the program of the educational 

 department was carried out under the direction of Dr. Raymond S. 

 Stites, curator in charge, and his staff. On January 1, 1966, Dr. Stites 

 became Assistant to the Director for Educational Services, and Dr. 

 Margaret Bouton, formerly associate curator, became curator in 

 charge of educational work. In addition to these changes, four em- 

 ployees were transferred from the publications office to the educational 

 department when the latter department took over responsibility for 

 the reception desks in the lobbies. 



The educational department continued its series of lectures, con- 

 ducted tours, and special talks on the works of art in the Gallery's 

 collection. Attendance for the 741 general tours was 20,144. This is 

 an increase of 1,239 over last year. Attendance for all regularly 

 scheduled general tours, tours of the week, and picture of the week talks 

 amounted to 40,123 — an increase over last year of 3,280. 



Special tours, lectures, and conferences (a total of 610) were arranged 

 to serve 20,888 persons. This is an increase of 4,578 over last year. 

 These included special appointments made for other government 

 agencies and bureaus such as the Department of State, Foreign Service 

 Institute, Foreign Students Service Council, and the Armed Forces. 

 Tours, lectures, and conferences were also arranged for many club and 

 study groups, members of the United States Congress, educators (both 

 American and foreign), museum officials, representatives from hos- 

 pitals (with patients), members of national and local chapters of 

 women's organizations, and groups of professional men and women 

 attending conventions in Washington. These special services were also 

 given to school groups coming from all areas of the country. 



The program of training volunteer docents was continued, and the 

 department gave special instruction to 159 women from the Junior 

 League of Washington, D.C., and from the American Association of 

 University Women. By arrangement with the public and private 

 schools in the District of Columbia and surrounding counties of Mary- 

 land and Virginia, these two organizations conducted 2,814 classes 

 from the metropolitan area of Washington on tours, totaling 80,623 

 children. This is an increase of 160 classes and 4,689 children over 

 last year when 2,654 classes visited the Gallery. The volunteers also 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 315 



guided 744 Safety Patrol girls from Atlanta, Georgia, on tours of the 

 Gallery. 



Fifty lectures were given in the auditorium on Sundays with slides or 

 films. The attendance at these lectures was 14,975 persons, represent- 

 ing an increase over last year of 2,406. Twenty-nine of these lectures 

 were given by guest lecturers. The A. W. Mellon Lectures in the Fine 

 Arts, given in 1966 by Lord David Cecil of Cambridge University, 

 constituted a series of six and bore the title "Dreamer or Visionary — 

 A Study of English Romantic Painting." Fifteen lectures were given 

 by members of the staff of the educational department. 



The slide library of the educational department has a total of 49,648 

 slides in its permanent and lending collections. During the year 697 

 slides were added, and 2,308 slides were recatalogued. A total of 

 8,922 slides was lent to 292 persons, and it is estimated that these were 

 seen by 16,990 viewers. 



Members of the staff participated in outside activities which included 

 lecturing to various club and school groups, and to other government 

 agencies. One staff member was responsible for the LecTour re- 

 cordings, which included the processing of 92 tapes. 



Staff members prepared and recorded 30 ten-minute radio talks 

 which were broadcast over radio station WGMS in Washington, D.C. 

 They also participated in the Widening Horizons Program, which is 

 designed by various government agencies to introduce area high school 

 students to the career opportunities offered in Washington. In this 

 program staff members prepared and delivered eight briefing lectures 

 and gave six special tours for volunteers. These lectures were attended 

 by 130 persons. 



A printed calendar of the programs and events of the Gallery was 

 prepared for monthly distribution to a mailing list of approximately 

 9,600 names, an estimated increase of 2,100. 



Total public response to the educational program, excluding slide 

 viewers, was 166,209, which is an increase of 17,053 over last year. 



Extension Services 



The Office of Extension Services, under the direction of Dr. Grose 

 Evans, circulated to the public, traveling exhibitions, films, slide 

 lectures with texts, film strips, and other educational materials. 



Traveling exhibitions are lent free of charge except for shipping 

 expenses. The total number of exhibits was 149, and these were 

 circulated in 1,122 bookings. This represents an increase over last 

 year of 278 bookings. 



In addition there are 12 exhibits on loan to two organizations which 




316 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



are circulating them. A large panel exhibition Color and Light in 

 Painting was completed and will be circulated by the Smithsonian 

 Institution Traveling Exhibition Service. 



Fifty prints of three films on the National Gallery of Art and its 

 collections were circulated in 417 bookings; an increase in bookings 

 over last year of 101. 



A total of 2,160 slide lecture sets was circulated in 6,872 bookings, an 

 increase of 1,155 bookings over last year. Ten slide sets are now 

 being circulated with records, and Dr. Evans prepared a new slide 

 lecture "Painting in Georgian England" based on paintings in the 

 collection of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon. Two hundred copies will be 

 circulated by the Extension Services. 



Based on the conservative average estimates per booking used in the 

 past, the audience served by the traveling exhibitions circulated by the 

 National Gallery was approximately 561,000 viewers; for the special 

 exhibitions being circulated by two other organizations, 72,014 viewers, 

 for the three films the estimated audience was 125,100 and for the 

 slide lectures and film strips, the audience was estimated to be 412,320. 

 It is estimated, therefore, that the Extension Services reached approxi- 

 mately 1,170,434 people — an increase of 199,371 over last year. 



A new system of direct reporting of audience size by borrowing 

 institutions has led to a revision of audience accounting methods in 

 the interest of greater accuracy. The improved method, which is 

 still under study, indicates a decrease in the estimated audience in one 

 category and varying increases in the other two. Calculated on the 

 new basis, the total number of people recorded in fiscal 1965 is esti- 

 mated to have been 1,418,684. 



In an effort to increase the circulation of the Extension Services 

 materials and to keep abreast of new developments in the audio-visual 

 field, Dr. Evans and his assistants traveled to various states attending 

 12 meetings and conventions, at which examples of the Extension 

 Services materials were exhibited. 



Dr. Evans also assisted in the organization of a pilot research teachers 

 training program to be conducted at the National Gallery of Art by the 

 George Washington University. Forty teachers chosen by the Uni- 

 versity from applications received form all parts of the country will be 

 given a 6-week program from July 5 to August 12, 1966. 



Library 



During the year the library accessioned 3,355 publications by gift, 

 exchange with other institutions, or by purchase. A total of 1,600 

 publications was processed; 5,551 cards were filed in the main catalogue 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 317 



and the shelflist. Library of Congress cards were used for 390 tides; 

 original cataloging was done for 365 titles. 



There were 3,136 periodicals recorded, received by gift, purchase, 

 or exchange. A total of 7,552 periodicals was circulated, and 4,145 

 books were charged to the staff. There were 6,524 books shelved in 

 regular routine. 



During the year the library distributed 1,625 National Gallery of 

 Art publications under its exchange program and in response to 

 individual requests. 



In this fiscal year the library borrowed 1,015 books, 946 of them 

 from the Library of Congress. 



The library is the depository for black and white photographs of 

 works of art in the Gallery's collection. These are maintained for 

 use in research by the staff, for exchange with other institutions, for 

 reproduction in approved publications, and for sale to the public. 

 Approximately 6,581 photographs were added to the stock in the 

 library during the year, and 1,571 orders for 7,890 photographs were 

 filled. There were 472 permits for reproduction of 1,283 subjects 

 processed in the library. 



Index of American Design 



Under the supervision of Dr. Grose Evans, the Index of American 

 Design, circulated 31 traveling exhibitions for 65 showings in 21 

 states and one foreign country. The Index also circulated 135 sets of 

 color slides throughout the United States, and 432 photographs of 

 Index subjects were used for exhibits, study, and publication. The 

 photographic file was increased by 102 negatives and 328 prints; 

 14 permits were issued to persons wishing to reproduce 254 subjects. 

 The Index material was used by 304 persons, for the purpose of securing 

 slides, exhibits, doing special research and design, and gathering 

 illustrations for publications. 



A number of special exhibitions of Index materials were arranged 

 for showing in museums devoted to folk art; and an exhibition honoring 

 the Christmas stamp issued by the Post Office Department in 1965 and 

 based on an Index subject was assembled and circulated throughout 

 the year. 



Operation, Maintenance, Activities, and Protection 



The Gallery building, mechanical equipment and grounds were 

 maintained throughtout the year at the established standards. 

 Renovation of the skylight on the east wing of the building last 




318 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — HISTORY AND ART 



summer completes the entire resealing of the more than two and one- 

 half acres of roof area. 



The Gallery greenhouse continued to produce flowering and foliage 

 plants in quantities sufficient for all decorative needs of special openings 

 and day to day requirements of the Garden Courts. 



Ultrasonic protection was installed in seven exhibition cases of 

 Renaissance jewelry and other decorative art objects. Also, the same 

 type of security system was installed in a vitrine in which the recently 

 acquired Saint George and the Dragon is exhibited. 



LecTour 



During the fiscal year 1966 LecTour, the Gallery's electronic guide 

 system, was used by 71,811 visitors — an increase of 13,690 users over 

 fiscal year 1965. 



Music Program 



Under the supervision of Richard H. Bales, assistant to the director 

 in charge of music, the program continued and forty concerts were 

 given during the fiscal year in the East Garden Court. Thirty-nine of 

 these concerts were played on Sunday evenings and one on Thursday 

 evening. The latter was played during the 25th Anniversary celebra- 

 tion of the National Gallery of Art. Thirty-two of these Sunday con- 

 certs were made possible by funds bequeathed to the National Gallery 

 of Art by Mr. William Nelson Cromwell; the 23rd American Music 

 Festival of seven concerts between May 1 and June 12, 1966, was 

 sponsored by the J. I. Foundation. The Gallery orchestra, conducted 

 by Mr. Bales, played 12 concerts. Two of these orchestra programs 

 were supported in part by a grant from the Music Performance Trust 

 Fund of the American Recording Industry. 



All concerts, except the 25th Anniversary Concert, were broadcast 

 by WGMS-AM and FM. Music critics of the Washington papers 

 continued their regular coverage of the concerts. 



Intermission talks during the Sunday evening broadcasts featured 

 members of the staff of the educational department speaking on various 

 art topics, and there were occasional interviews with guest lecturers. 

 Mr. Bales gave program notes during the intermissions of these broad- 

 casts. 



Mr. Bales was in residence at the University of Rochester during 

 July and early August 1965, and conducted concerts and lectured on 

 conducting at the Eastman School of Music. He received the first 

 Distinguished Service Award from the Sons of Confederate Veterans 

 in recognition of his work in Civil War music. 




NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 319 



Two one-hour television programs by the National Gallery orchestra 

 with Mr. Bales conducting were taped by WTOP-TV, and these with 

 a previously taped program were telecast during the fiscal year. 

 Paintings from the National Gallery of Art collection were shown during 

 these concerts. In September 1965 a previous telecast by the National 

 Gallery of Art orchestra won a local "Emmy" award. 



Mr. Bales appeared several times as a guest conductor and lecturer; 

 a number of his compositions and arrangements were performed by 

 other orchestras. 



During May the National Gallery concerts and Mr. Bales received 

 their fourth award from the American Association of University Women 

 for a cultural contribution to the community through their television 

 concerts. 



During April 1 966 Mr. Bales served as Chairman of the Instrumental 

 Music Panel of the Arts Advisory Committee of the District of Columbia 

 Recreation Board. 



Other Activities 



In commemoration of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the National 

 Gallery of Art, twenty-five medals were struck and awarded "For 

 Distinguished Service to Education in Art." The recepients were 

 flown to Washington for the Twenty-fifth Anniversary celebrations and 

 were awarded the medals by Mrs. Johnson in the East Room of the 

 White House on March 17. The obverse of the medal was designed 

 by the sculptor and graphic artist, Leonard Baskin, and the reverse 

 by the calligrapher and stone-carver, John Everett Benson. The 

 recepients of the medals also received a cash honorarium. 



Director John Walker, served as chairman of the committee to make 

 arrangements for the visit to Washington of more than 500 directors 

 curators from sixty nations who had come to America for the first 

 meeting outside Europe of the International Council of Museums. 

 Bus tours and hospitality for ICOM delegates were made possible 

 through a donation to the Gallery by the Samuel H. Kress Foundation. 

 On Saturday, September 18, a luncheon for visiting art museum repre- 

 sentatives was given before the opening of the John Singleton Copley 

 exhibition. 



The Gallery provided facilities for the ceremony held by the Post 

 Office Department on September 17, 1965, in honor of the first day 

 issue of a stamp in the Fine Arts Series. The stamp is based on a detail 

 from The Copley Family, by John Singleton Copley, in the National 

 Gallery's collection. 




320 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Henry Beville, head of the photographic laboratory, and his assistants 

 processed 61,037 items which included negatives, prints, slides, color 

 transparencies, and color slides. 



Audit of Private Funds of the Gallery 



An audit of the private funds of the Gallery will be made for the 

 fiscal year ended June 30, 1966, by Price Waterhouse and Co., public 

 accountants. A report of the audit will be forwarded to the Gallery. 




John F. Kennedy Center for the 

 Performing Arts 



Roger L. Stevens 

 Chairman, Board of Trustees 





'"pHIS YEAR OF EFFORT AND ACCOMPLISHMENT Saw the Start of COnstrUC- 



■*■ tion on the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. 

 Property rights to the site were cleared. The Watergate Inn, a restau- 

 rant on the original site, is being preserved as a headquarters for the 

 builders and as an exhibition area for the Center during construction. 

 But all other buildings were removed and excavation is nearly finished. 

 Relocation of the Rock Creek Potomac Parkway will be completed late 

 this fall. Invitations to bid on the general contract were issued in 

 June. The doors of the Center should open in 1969. 



The Metropolitan Opera National Company, co-sponsored by the 

 Center and the Metropolitan Opera Association, completed its in- 

 augural tour of 70 North American cities. Congress granted the Center 

 distribution rights to the United States Information Agency film, John 

 F. Kennedy: Tears of Lightning — Day of Drums, and it was seen by 1 50,000 

 people to date. It will begin its regular run throughout the country in 

 fall. The Friends of the Kennedy Center was formed as a volunteer 

 organization to promote nationwide interest in the Center and its 

 operations. Leonard Bernstein, music director of the New York Phil- 

 harmonic Orchestra, agreed to compose a major work for the Center's 

 opening in 1969. Activity, interest, and progress in all aspects of the 

 Center should increase in the next 12 months. 



321 




322 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Organization 



Three Presidents have played a direct, personal role in the John F. 

 Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. The Center was authorized 

 originally as the National Cultural Center by an Act of Congress signed 

 into law by President Eisenhower in September 1958. The law speci- 

 fied that money for the Center's construction was to be raised within 5 

 years by voluntary contribution. Congress authorized a nationwide 

 fund-raising campaign for this purpose. The Act was extended 3 more 

 years during the Kennedy administration. 



Following the death of President Kennedy, a spontaneous movement 

 developed to make the Cultural Center, in which he had taken such a 

 close personal interest, his sole official memorial in the Nation's capital. 

 President Johnson incorporated this sentiment in an Administration 

 request to Congress in December 1963. The measure was passed with 

 bipartisan support and signed into law by the President on January 23, 

 1964 (Public Law 88-260). At the same time, Congress authorized a 

 grant of $15.5 million to match private contributions toward the cost of 

 construction. The matching funds were subscribed or in the bank 

 prior to the statutory deadline of June 30, 1965, insuring that the 

 Center would become a reality. 



Board of Trustees 



Pursuant to the John F. Kennedy Center Act, the Board of Trustees 

 of the Center is made up to 15 members who serve ex officio, and 30 

 "general trustees." As of June 30, 1966, the Trustees of the Center 

 were as follows : 



Appointed by the President of the United States 



Richard Adler Erich Leinsdorf 



Howard F. Ahmanson Sol Myron Linowitz 



Floyd D. Akers George Meany 



Robert O. Anderson Edwin W. Pauley 



Ralph E. Becker Arthur Penn 



K. LeMoyne Billings Richard S. Reynolds, Jr. 



Mrs. Thomas W. Braden Frank H. Ricketson, Jr. 



Edgar M. Bronfman Richard Rodgers 



Mrs. George R. Brown Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. 



Ralph J. Bunche Mrs. Jouett Shouse 



Mr. Justice Fortas Mrs. Stephen E. Smith 



Mrs. George A. Garrett Roger L. Stevens 



Leonard H. Goldenson Edwin L. Weisl, Sr. 



Senator Robert F. Kennedy Robert W. Woodruff 

 Mrs. Albert D. Lasker 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 323 



President Johnson reluctantly accepted the resignation of Mr. Ernest 

 R. Breech as Trustee on March 17, 1966. 



Appointed by the President of the United States Senate 

 Senator Joseph S. Clark Senator J. William Fulbright 



Senator Leverett Saltonstall 



Appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives 

 Representative Charlotte T. Reid Representative Frank H. Thompson, 



Representative James C. Wright, Jr. Jr. 



Members Ex Officio Designated by Act of Congress 



Charles Frankel S. Dillon Ripley 



George B. Hartzog, Jr. Walter N. Tobriner 



Harold Howe, II William Walton 



John William Gardner William H. Waters, Jr. 



L. Quincy Mumford 



Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, Mrs. John F. Kennedy, and Mrs. Dwight D. 



Eisenhower continue to serve" as honorary co-chairmen of the Center. 

 The Trustees met on February 7, 1 966, and elected the officers of the 



Center. They are as follows: 



Roger L. Stevens, Chairman Kenneth J. Birgfeld, Assistant Treas- 



Robert O. Anderson, Vice Chairman urer 



Sol M. Linowitz, Vice Chairman Paul J. Bisset, Assistant Treasurer 



Ralph E. Becker, General Counsel Herbert D. Lawson, Assistant Treas- 



Daniel W. Bell, Treasurer urer 



K. LeMoyne Billings, Secretary L. Corrin Strong, Chairman Emeritus 



Philip J. Mullin, Administrative Offi- 

 cer and Assistant Secretary 



Site and Construction Progress 



Immediately after the announcement of the completion of General 

 Accounting Office auditing of the certification of funds for matching 

 purposes, another flurry of opposition to the location of the Center 

 arose. For several weeks the Chairman, the General Counsel, and 

 other officers were occupied in answering criticisms of the Potomac 

 River site. The officers of the Center were strongly supported by the 

 Senatorial and Congressional members of the Board of Trustees. 



The closing of streets and alleys in the Center site occasioned another 

 outbreak of opposition. Objections lodged by Watergate Development 

 to the closing of streets in the Center site were withdrawn after meetings 

 of persons concerned were arranged by the General Counsel. The 

 Board of Commissioners of the District of Columbia ordered the closing 

 after extensive public hearings, at which the Center was represented by 




324 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



its General Counsel. An opinion by the Solicitor of the Department of 

 the Interior, concurred in by the Attorney General, supported the 

 Center's stand that land, including closed streets and alleys, outside the 

 statutory site could be used for park setting purposes. 



In the meantime, the Department of Justice reached an agreement 

 with the Watergate Inn on a condemnation price of $650,000 for the 

 restaurant and land. This marked the end of more than 2 years of 

 negotiations and completed the acquisition of private property for the 

 Center. An opinion is now being awaited from the Attorney General 

 that all land in the Center site is property of the United States. Plans 

 are underway for the transfer of jurisdiction over the various parcels 

 among the governmental agencies concerned. The last legal require- 

 ment imposed by the John F. Kennedy Center Act was met when the 

 Regents of the Smithsonian Institution found formally that the Center 

 had sufficient funds for construction. 



The Comptroller General of the United States authorized General 

 Services Administration to solicit bids for the general construction 

 contract on a selective basis, following a determination by the Ad- 

 ministrator of GSA and the Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the 

 Center that advertised competitive bidding was not practicable. Nine 

 firms, selected on the basis of such considerations as reliability and 

 experience with similar projects, were invited to submit bids in June. 

 They were: George Hyman Construction Company and Charles H. 

 Tompkins Company, of Washington, D.C. ; McCloskey and Company 

 and John McShain, Inc., of Philadelphia; J. W. Bateson Company of 

 Dallas; Turner Company, George A. Fuller Construction Company, 

 and Paul Tishman Company, of New York; and Pashen-Kiewit of 

 Chicago and Omaha. 



The Board of Trustees passed a resolution opposing the erection of 

 Watergate Development Building No. 1 to any height not substantially 

 lower than the Center. To protect its interests, the Center has been 

 represented at hearings before the Board of Zoning Appeals on matters 

 raised by Watergate. 



Contracts were awarded for demolition of the buildings on the 

 Center's site, for excavation, and for the relocation of the Rock Creek 

 Potomac Parkway. A fence was constructed around the site and signs 

 erected. Electric display panels describing the Center are being 

 prepared. 



During the last month of the fiscal year, Colonel William F. Powers 

 (U.S. Army, retired) was retained as Executive Director of Engineering. 

 Colonel Powers, who served 28 years in the Corps of Engineers, will 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 325 



join the Center's staff on completion of his duties as Vice President of 

 Engineering for the Lincoln Center. In his New York assignment he 

 supervised the construction of all the buildings in the new performing 

 arts center. 



The insurance requirements of the Center were almost unique. In a 

 major administrative action, unusual specifications were planned to 

 permit adequate insurance coverage during the construction phase 

 and beyond. 



JFK Center-GSA Liaison Committee 



The General Services Administration is the Center's agent for design 

 and construction and will continue in this capacity through the con- 

 struction phase. A special liaison committee, made up of five Trustees 

 and representatives of GSA and the architect will be responsible 

 for the final plans and specifications on all phases of construction. 

 The Trustee members of this committee are Chairman Stevens, Mrs. 

 Jouett Shouse, S. Dillon Ripley, George B. Hartzog, Jr., and Ralph 

 E. Becker. The Director of Engineering will join the Administrative 

 Officer as an ex officio member of the committee. 



Several architectural changes in the Center's interior were recom- 

 mended by the JFK-GSA Liaison Committee in accordance with 

 suggestions by the Program Committee. The following changes were 

 then approved by the Liaison Committee, the Executive Committee, 

 and the Board of Trustees: elimination of a special "public reception 

 center" (including a small cinema, reception room, and mezzanine), 

 the addition of access doors to the stages of the Opera and the Theater, 

 additional dressing facilities, addition of a director's suite, reduction of 

 the opera stage apron, provision for hidden television camera locations, 

 reservation of unallotted space for possible extra rehearsal areas and 

 office space, alterations in the roof terrace restaurant facilities, and an 

 increase in the window area on the roof terrace. These changes were 

 incorporated in the final plans sent out for bids. 



As a result of studies and recommendations by the Liaison Com- 

 mittee, an arrangement was made with Potomac Electric Power Com- 

 pany for equipping the Center as an all-electric building. All the 

 energy needs, including heating and air conditioning, will embody 

 concepts developed by the architect in close coordination with PEPCO 

 engineers. The arrangement with PEPCO will result in substantial 

 savings in construction costs. 



230-457—66 27 




326 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



Program Committee 



The Program Committee, under the chairmanship of Arthur 

 Schlesinger, Jr., has held seven meetings in the past year. The members 

 of this committee include: 



Mrs. Thomas W. Braden Goddard Lieberson 



Harold E. Clurman Sol M. Linowitz 



Mr. Justice Fortas S. Dillon Ripley 



Richard N. Goodwin Oliver Smith 



August Heckscher George Stevens, Jr. 



Mrs. John F. Kennedy Roger L. Stevens (ex officio) 



The committee consulted with outstanding professionals in the performing 

 arts to study the most effective use of the Center's facilities. On the 

 basis of the original Congressional mandate, the committee has studied 

 theories and formats of artistic management, possible establishment 

 of resident companies, the potential for the use of private and public 

 television to extend the Center's range of activity, and various educa- 

 tional opportunities. The committee recommended that priority be 

 given to the selection of the artistic management staff and that the 

 final statement of program policy be deferred in order to permit the 

 artistic director and his staff to praticipate in establishing the policy. 



Because of the substantially increasing interest and activity in the 

 performing arts throughout the country since the original concept of 

 the Center was formed a decade ago, several changes were recom- 

 mended in the interior plans. The changes were intended to make the 

 facilities of the Center more flexible and to extend the educational 

 possibilities within the Center. 



On June 23, it was announced that Leonard Bernstein, the eminent 

 and versatile composer and music director of the New York Phil- 

 harmonic Orchestra, had agreed to compose a major dramatic work 

 for the Center's opening. Mr. Bernstein, in accepting the commission, 

 recognized the national significance of the Center and expressed deep 

 appreciation of the cultural interests of President Kennedy. 



Memorial Committee 



The River Terrace of the Center, overlooking the expanse ol the 

 Potomac, is being considered as a site for a special memorial to 

 President Kennedy. The committee and Edward Durell Stone, the 

 Center's architect, have reviewed several ideas and expect to make 

 their recommendation in the coming year, subject to approval by the 

 Center's Trustees, the Regents of the Smithsonian Institution, and 

 Congress. 




■i! 





New model of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts soon to 

 be put on display at the visitors' center (formerly the Watergate Inn) on 

 the site. Above: Entrance. Below: River terrace above Rock Creek Park- 

 way, overlooking Potomac River. 



aftrtt.tff 



JbaX.. m 



ill JL.JI 




The Opera, central hall of the Center, will seat 2,200. The stage will be 

 60 feet wide, 100 feet deep. 



Mk 



YX 1 ?- 







"4 . «f v 



v.?'«-F 



'v.-i- 



Eg.- 



WL>k 






The Theater (above) will seat 1,100 and the Concert Hall (below) will 

 seat 2,700, both are on the main level, flanking the Opera. 




The Studio Playhouse, above the Theater on the roof-terrace level, can be 

 used as a conventional theater, or with a thrust stage (top), for theater-in- 

 the-round (center), or as a film theater (below). 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 327 



Friends of the Kennedy Center 



Early this year the Trustees passed a resolution creating the Friends 

 of the Kennedy Center, a self-supporting volunteer organization, to 

 aid the Center in establishing its national scope. The first meeting 

 of the National Council of the Friends of the Kennedy Center was held 

 on June 27, and the following officers were elected: 



Mrs. Frank G. Wisner, Chairman Murray Preston, Treasurer 



Mrs. Polk Guest, Vice Chairman Mrs. Llewellyn E. Thompson, 



George Stevens, Jr., Vice Chairman Member-at-Large 

 Mrs. David Ginsburg, Secretary 



Representing the Center's Board of Trustees on the National Council 

 are the officers and Mrs. George Garrett, Mrs. Albert Lasker, and 

 Mrs. Jouett Shouse. 



Mrs. Thomas W. Braden of California and Douglas Dillon of New 

 Jersey were named co-chairman of the National Membership Drive, 

 currently under way. 



The purpose of the National Committee of the Friends of the Kennedy 

 Center is to develop activities and programs to bring attention to the 

 Center, its purposes and plans; and to enlist the active support of the 

 Center by members of the National Committee. Specific objectives 

 of the National Committee will be developed by the National Council 

 from time to time, subject at all times to approval of the Trustees of 

 the Center. 



Fund-Raising and Gifts 



Active fund-raising efforts for the Center were curtailed after the 

 $15.5 million Federal grant was matched, as required by law, by 

 June 30, 1965. The Development Committee, however, under 

 the chairmanship of Robert O. Anderson will continue to assess the 

 immediate and future needs and to solicit foundations and individuals 

 for additional major contributions. Fortunately, with the addition 

 of several small contributions the interest income substantially exceeded 

 the operating expenses for the year. 



Since the above statutory deadline, several months have been lost 

 because of procedural delays, plan reviews, and revisions. There has 

 been some increase in wage scales and in materials and other costs. 

 It is hoped, nevertheless, that the building can be completed at a cost 

 close to present estimates and without the need for changes, deletions, 

 or more funds. 



Models of the sculptured bronze panels given by the German Govern- 

 ment for the two main entrances to the Center were unveiled at a 




328 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



ceremony at the German Embassy in January. Designed by the 

 distinguished young German sculptor, Jurgen Weber, each panel 

 will measure 40 feet long and 8 feet high. The panel leading into the 

 Hall of States will have a theme based on the ideals of President 

 Kennedy. The theme of the panel over the entrance to the Hall of 

 Nations will deal with the performing arts as contributants to peace. 

 The weaving of the Opera House curtain, a gift from the Government 

 of Japan and the America-Japan Society of Tokyo, is under way 

 The Japanese are making a 16-mm. film of this unique gift as the 

 craftsmen progress. The Center's architect has been working with the 

 designers of the Norwegian gift of crystal chandeliers and the Danish 

 gift of furniture. Sketches of the Waterford crystal chandelier, a gift 

 of the people of Ireland, have been submitted to Mr. Stone for approval. 



Contracts have been signed for the quarrying and cutting of the 

 marble donated to the Center by the Italian Government. The three 

 companies chosen by the architect after extensive testing and sampling 

 are Bufalini, Henraux, and Montecatini. All the marble is being 

 quarried in the vicinity of Carrara, some of it coming from the same 

 quarry used by Michelangelo for many of his statues. These contracts 

 were drafted to assure that sufficient marble will be available for 

 construction when needed. Special insurance coverage was planned. 

 Shipments of marble will be coming from the port of Leghorn in late 

 fall, and will be transported without charge to Baltimore as a gift from 

 the American Export-Isbrandtsen Lines. 



Many other foreign nations have expressed an interest in presenting 

 a gift to the Center and negotiations are being carried on with them. 



The Fine Arts Accessions Committee held meetings to consider various 

 gifts offered to the Center. Gifts recently accepted include a Japanese 

 Byobu two-panel screen, from a group of Japanese ladies, and a Salt 

 Glaze Planter executed by Kenneth Ferguson, from the Kiln Club 

 of Washington. The Planter received a Kiln Club award at the Tenth 

 Annual Exhibition of Ceramic Art held at the Smithsonian Institution 

 last fall. 



The John Philip Sousa Memorial Committee, appointed by the 

 American Bandmasters Association, has continued its campaign for a 

 $100,000 endowment to provide the stage and acoustical sound re- 

 flectors in the Concert Hall. The committee reported that 71 percent 

 of the goal has been reached and that it anticipates 100 percent success 

 during the school term beginning in September. The stage will be 

 named in honor of Mr. Sousa. 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 329 



Consultants 



Final plans for the Center, on which construction bids were received, 

 required expert assistance in many areas. In addition to the resources 

 of Edward Durell Stone, architect and his associates, the following were 

 engineering consultants to the architect: Syska & Hennessy, Inc., 

 mechanical and electrical engineers; Meuser, Rutledge, Wentworth 

 and Johnston, foundation engineers; Donald Oenslager, Mr. Stone's 

 stage-design consultant; Abe Feder, lighting consultant; Ben Schlanger, 

 seating consultant; and Olaf Soot, stage machinery consultant. Dr. 

 Cyril Harris, acoustics consultant, designed the Center's acoustical 

 systems. Edward D. Stone, Jr., is landscape architect and Sasaki, 

 Walker, and Associates serve as landscape consultants. 



Numerous members of the staff of the Public Buildings Service of the 

 General Services Administration have participated in the design de- 

 velopment of the John F. Kennedy Center. Among them special 

 recognition is appropriate for Karel Yasko, Assistant Commissioner 

 for Design; L. Anthony Ziernicki, Assistant Commissioner for Construc- 

 tion; J. Rowland Snyder, Director, Architectural Division; Robert R. 

 Jones, Director, Mechanical and Electrical Division; Arthur Westrich, 

 Director, Structural Division; James Francis, Director, Specifications 

 Division; James H. Jones, Project Coordinator; Ray Whitley, Chief, 

 Elevator Branch; Harry Kay, Estimator, Estimates Division; Edward 

 Kearney, Chief, Electrical Estimates Branch. Dr. Vern O. Knudsen 

 reviewed the Center's acoustical design. 



Special Projects 



The Metropolitan Opera National Company, co-sponsored by the 

 Center and the Metropolitan Opera Association, completed its in- 

 augural tour on June 12. The tour began at Clowes Memorial Hall 

 in Indianapolis, Indiana, last September 20. When the tour ended in 

 Guadalajara, Mexico, the company had performed in 71 cities on the 

 North American continent. The four operas presented were Bizet's 

 Carmen (in French and English), Puccini's Madama Butterfly (in Italian 

 and English), Carlisle Floyd's Susannah, and Rossini's Cinderella (in 

 English). 



During the tour auditions were held in various regions of the country. 

 New singers, including two from Washington, D.C., were signed for 

 next year's tour. 




330 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 HISTORY AND ART 



The company's second tour will begin on September 15, in Indian- 

 apolis, where it opened last year. Many new cities have been added to 

 the itinerary. The repertory for the second season will be Puccini's 

 La Bo/ieme, Verdi's La Traviata, Mozart's Marriage of Figaro and Benja- 

 min Britten's Rape of Lucretia. Because of the nature of the Center's 

 agreement with the Metropolitan Opera Association in establishing the 

 National Company, all financial obligations of the Center were dis- 

 charged in the first season, and there are no continuing financial 

 obligations. 



Ordinarily films produced by the United States Information Agency 

 can be shown only in foreign countries. By special legislation, however, 

 Congress authorized the Center to distribute domestically the USIA 

 film John F. Kennedy: Tears of Lightning — Day of Drums, believing that 

 this particular film should be available to all Americans. 



A Congressional resolution approved on October 7, provided for the 

 purchase of the film by the Center from the USIA for $122,000. The 

 resolution directed that the proceeds from all commercial showings of 

 the film would accrue to the Center. Congress also made clear its 

 intent that there should be no showing of the film which would serve a 

 partisan political purpose, and that when the film was made available 

 to educational and other nonprofit groups, it would be at no profit to 

 the Center. 



On January 3, the Trustees entered into a contract with Embassy 

 Pictures Corporation for the commercial theatrical distribution of the 

 film. Embassy Pictures Corporation agreed to waive all distribution 

 fees. Negotiations have been initiated for eventual release of the film 

 to nonprofit organizations as agreed with Embassy Films. An agree- 

 ment was also reached with Capitol Records to permit the marketing of 

 the film's soundtrack as an LP record from which royalties will be paid 

 to the Center. The Center received an advance of royalities of $50,000 

 from Capitol Records. 



John F. Kennedy: Tears of Lightning — Day of Drums opened at the 

 Lincoln Art Theatre in New York City on April 10. The film was 

 shown on a continuous performance basis through mid-June. Because 

 of public demand it was shown also at the Cinema I Theater in New 

 York City and had a successful 9-week run there. The film has sub- 

 sequently been shown in Boston and Chicago and is scheduled this fall 

 for showing in commercial theaters in all 50 states. 



The Tom Sawyer Project involves a wooden fence surrounding the 

 construction site. The fence, erected last spring, has 250 panels, each 8 

 feet by 8 feet. These inspired a local organization to conceive the idea 

 of having boys and girls decorate the panels with murals. Plans were 

 made to have children in the District of Columbia's Widening Horizons 




KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 331 



project paint 17 of the panels, after first receiving basic instruction from 

 Roger Selby, curator of education at the Corcoran Gallery of Art. 

 Plans are also under way by the Friends of the Kennedy Center to 

 expand the project. 



The Year Ahead 



The construction of the building will be well advanced during the 

 coming 12 months. As construction proceeds and problems relating 

 to it are met and solved, the attention of the Trustees will be turned to 

 the artistic management of the Center and to the development of 

 artistic concepts and programs in greater detail. As the policies of the 

 Center in this sphere are developed, so will be developed promotional 

 and financial programs to implement these policies. While the stone, 

 steel, and mortar give physical shape to the Center, the Trustees will be 

 pressing ahead to shape its intellectual and cultural dimensions for the 

 realization of the bright future that the John F. Kennedy Center holds 

 for the nation. 





Other Smithsonian Activities 





Smithsonian Institution Libraries 



Mary A. Huffer, Acting Director 



K 



'"T'he Smithsonian institution libraries continue to develop under 

 ■*~ the enthusiastic revitalizing encouragement of the Secretary and 

 the unstinting support of the scientists and historians of the Institution. 

 The Office of the Director of Smithsonian Institution Libraries was 

 established in December 1965. Library service within the Institution 

 is rendered through a complex network of bureau, branch, depart- 

 mental, and divisional libraries. Acquisitions and cataloging of all 

 materials for the various units are performed by the central library. 

 Most special subject collections are located in the immediate vicinity of 

 the object collection to which they pertain, but general reference and 

 bibliographic tools, together with extensive interdisciplinary, periph- 

 eral, and less immediately needed materials, are kept in the Central 

 Library collection. 



Central Library 



An extension of library service for Smithsonian staff was carried out 

 by the Smithsonian liaison librarian at the Library of Congress. 



Material for translation amounting to 4,342 pages was submitted 

 during fiscal year 1966 on the Special Foreign Currency Information 

 Program and 5,077 pages were prepared for submittal in fiscal 1967. All 

 of these represent Russian literature to be translated into English in 

 Israel under sponsorship of the National Science Foundation. Progress 

 continues on translation of the Russian Academy of Sciences Flora 

 USSR, with 6 volumes of the 30 volume set in process or completed. 

 Four more volumes of the multivolume Keys to the Fauna USSR and 



335 




336 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



2 more of the Fauna USSR were submitted. Greater emphasis has 

 been put on translation of material on the history of science and 

 technology, with 6 volumes now slated for translation. 



In the acquisitions section, the advent of automation and a sharp 

 increase in gifts and exchanges mark the fiscal year just ended. 



Electronic data processing is an innovation that will have a signifi- 

 cant long-range impact on operation of the library. Late in June 1965, 

 an IBM-29 key punch was installed in the acquisitions section, and 

 during fiscal 1966 all purchase orders were printed on the computer in 

 the Smithsonian's data processing unit. The ADP program now pro- 

 vides computer-printed purchase orders, bi-weekly reports on the 

 status of various accounts, receiving cards, book labels, Library of 

 Congress card order slips, and temporary catalog cards. 



Cataloging the large collection of materials transferred from the 

 Patent Office was completed during the year. The number of volumes 

 cataloged during the year has not quite kept abreast of incoming vol- 

 umes for the year: 10,097 cataloged to 11,201 received, therefore 

 leaving the backlog untouched. This is even more serious than it 

 seems, because material requiring original cataloging has been relegated 

 to the backlog while more easily handled literature (i.e., for which 

 Library of Congress cards exist) has been done as received or pulled 

 from the reserve supply in '"control" (or backlog) in order to get a 

 greater number of volumes moving through the department. Publi- 

 cations not already cataloged by the Library of Congress are probably 

 not owned by them or any other large research library; postponing 

 their cataloging, therefore, is a dubious expediency, but space problems 

 alone preclude deferment and consequent accumulation of large 

 amounts of material while catalogers spend extra time on original work. 



Simplified and reduced forms for statistics have been prepared for 

 use during the coming fiscal year. In October, Miss Clarice M. Barker, 

 who had been acting chief of the catalog section since December 1964 

 and serials cataloger for the library since July 1960, retired. 



Because this year's contractor for binding had difficulties in meeting 

 contract specifications, and major portions of most shipments had 

 to be reworked, the library's binding program suffered a serious set- 

 back. The binding unit moved into new, larger and brighter quarters 

 on the ground floor of the West Range of the Natural History building 

 in August. 



Branch Libraries 



As adequate space and equipment becomes available the library is 

 continuing to consolidate and reorganize many of the special and 




SMITHSONIAN LIBRARIES 337 



departmental collections. This year the Museum of Natural History 

 branch library, with the help of the botany department staff, completely 

 reorganized the botany library. Materials formerly housed in six 

 different locations are now shelved in the botany library on the fourth 

 floor of the west wing of the Natural History building. A temporary 

 card catalog was made by copying cards from the shelflist in the central 

 library. Review and weeding of the collection is now in process. In 

 April 1966, Dr. John A. Stevenson presented his mycological library to 

 the Institution. 



Preliminary work on reorganizing the paleobiology collections has 

 begun. A small reference collection was established and housed in the 

 Cooper reading room in the department, and all other materials were 

 transferred into the main natural history collection. 



Mrs. Gloria A. Mauney returned to the library after a year's absence 

 to take charge of the entomology library. A systematic review of all 

 serials in this collection is underway. 



In fall 1965 new stacks were installed in the anthropology library 

 quarters on the third floor of the east wing of the Natural History building. 

 This equipment allowed for the transfer of the former Bureau of 

 American Ethnology library to the new location, thus bringing into 

 one facility all the anthropological collections. This transfer involved 

 moving approximately 35,000 items from the Smithsonian building. 

 Prior to this move the library collections of the various divisions of the 

 former department of anthropology were combined and moved to the 

 new location. 



The card catalog was completely revised in the Museum of History 

 and Technology branch library: both the old and the new catalogs 

 were separated into author-title catalogs with separate subject catalogs. 

 The old shelflist was split to separate the trade literature shelflist from 

 the old shelflist for Dewey-classed books. These changes have made 

 the catalog considerably easier to use. 



During the past year, efforts have continued to develop a strong 

 facility to serve the National Collection of Fine Arts, while radically 

 expanding that aspect of the work supporting the National Portrait 

 Gallery, in anticipation of the move to the Fine Arts and Portrait 

 Galleries building (the renovated Old Patent Office building) next 

 year. William Walker, the branch librarian, is engaged in a project 

 with the Library of Congress subject cataloging division, to revise the 

 Library of Congress "N" classification schedule for books on fine arts. 

 In January Miss Ruth Carlson joined the staff as senior cataloger for 

 fine arts. 



230-457—66 28 




338 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



In the National Air and Space Museum branch library work con- 

 tinued on the preliminary sorting of the large bulk of materials accumu- 

 lated over the years and stored at the Silver Hill facility. A member of 

 the Museum staff spent one-half day a week in the catalog section for 

 training in library cataloging procedures and to assist in expediting the 

 processing of materials for that library. 



Staff Activities 



At the December meeting of the Society of Systematic Zoology in 

 Berkeley, California, an informal paper "Data Processing, the Natural 

 History Library and the Future," by Mary A. Huffer and Jean Chan- 

 dler Smith was presented by Mrs. Huffer. 



On April 27th the Federal Library Committee invited the Smith- 

 sonian to fill a vacancy in its membership for an unexpired term of two 

 years ending June 1967. The Acting Director of Smithsonian Institu- 

 tion Libraries was designated to represent the Institution on the Com- 

 mittee. Mrs. Huffer also continued to work with the Federal Library 

 Committee Task Force on Acquisitions of Library Materials and 

 Correlation of Federal Library Procedures. 



Informal lectures and tours of the Smithsonian Libraries were 

 given several times during the year for groups of foreign visitors and 

 library graduate students. Various library staff members took an 

 active part in training enrollees of the Neighborhood Youth Corps as 

 library assistants and aides throughout the year. 



Jean Chandler Smith continued work on the Bibliography on the 

 Chemical Composition and Nutrition of Endoparasites at the request of the 

 American Society of Parasitologists. 



The following papers by a library staff member appeared in various 

 journals: 



Goodwin, Jack S. Current bibliography in the history of technology 

 (1964). Technology and Culture (Spring 1966), vol. 7, pp. 268-300. 



. [Review of] Bibliography of the history of medicine in 



the United States and Canada, 1939-1960 (Baltimore: Johns 

 Hopkins Press, 1964). Technology and Culture (Fall 1965), vol. 6, 

 pp. 690-691. 



. [Review of] Sources of business information, by Edwin T. 



Coman (Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1964). Technology 

 and Culture (Winter 1966), vol. 7, pp. 123-124. 



. [Review of] Merchants and scholars, edit. John Parker 



(Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1966). Society for the 

 History of Discoveries, Newsletter (May 1966), p. 9. 




International Exchange Service 



J. A. Collins, Director 



r T~'HE international exchange service moved to new quarters in 

 -*- the Arts and Industries building during the fiscal year. The new 

 work area provides better facilities for the processing of publications 

 received for transmission. The total weight of publications processed 

 during the past year was the largest ever handled. Publications were 

 received from approximately 400 different organizations, institutions, 

 Government bureaus, Congressional committees, agricultural experi- 

 ment stations, and individuals for transmission to more than 100 

 different countries. Ocean freight rates were increased approximately 

 ten percent during the year, and the cost of materials and supplies 

 increased. A strike by the Maritime unions against some of the 

 steamship lines delayed the forwarding of publications to many 

 countries during the months of July, August, and September. 



Official United States publications were transmitted to 105 libraries 

 in other countries. Full sets were received by 59 libraries and partial 

 sets by 46. The only change during the year in the recipients of the 

 official publications was the addition of the Haile Sellassie I University, 

 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, to receive a partial set. Daily issues of the 

 Congressional Record and the Federal Register were mailed to 134 

 foreign depository libraries. 



President Johnson in his address at the Smithsonian Bicentennial 

 stated that, "we must embark on a new and a noble adventure: First 



339 




340 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



PACKAGES RECEIVED FOR TRANSMISSION FROM FOREIGN AND 

 DOMESTIC SOURCES, FISCAL YEAR 1966 



Classification 



For transmission abroad 

 by the Smithsonian 



Number of 

 packages 



Weight in 

 pounds 



Received by the 



Smithsonian for 



distribution in the 



United States 



Number of 

 packages 



Weight in 

 pounds 



U.S. parliamentary documents re- 

 ceived for transmission abroad . 



Publications received from foreign 

 sources for U.S. parliamentary 

 addressees 



U.S. departmental documents re- 

 ceived for transmission abroad . 



Publications received from foreign 

 sources for U.S. departmental 

 addressees 



Miscellaneous scientific and 

 literary publications received 

 for transmission abroad 



Miscellaneous scientific and 

 literary publications received 

 from abroad for distribution in 



the United States 



Total 



Total packages received . . . 

 Total pounds received 



920,015 



310,488 



354, 295 



326, 704 



10, 246 



7,060 



157,819 



1, 388, 322 

 1,461,720 



237, 343 



918, 342 



12,664 



18, 356 



to assist the education effort of the developing nations and the develop- 

 ing regions." 



During the past year over one hundred schools, colleges, and univer- 

 sities in the United States transmitted publications through the Inter- 

 national Exchange Service to libraries in other countries. Medical 

 and dental textbooks and journals were transmitted for a number of 

 medical and dental organizations to libraries and schools in other 

 countries, and textbooks were forwarded to schools in which Peace 

 Corps Volunteers were teaching. 



The Smithsonian Institution through the work of the International 

 Exchange Service has been able to carry out in a substantial way, the 

 request of the President. It also serves as a means of developing and 

 executing in part the broad and comprehensive objective, "the diffusion 

 of knowledge." 




Administrative Support Services 



A number of administrative divisions, operating behind the scenes, 

 serve the Smithsonian Institution by providing the technical assistance 

 and resources and other support that enable the bureaus and other 

 program activities to work productively and efficiently. In carrying 

 out this responsibility, these divisions directly share in the Institution's 

 accomplishments in research, exhibits, education, and public service. 

 The following brief statements highlight some of their activities and note 

 the more significant staff changes during this past year. 



An Office of Programming and Budget was established under the 

 Assistant Secretary to work closely with the Institution's museums and 

 scientific bureaus in studying their objectives, analyzing their programs, 

 and translating their essential requirements into sound budgets. In 

 April 1966, Edward H. Kohn, formerly executive officer of the Smith- 

 sonian's Science Information Exchange, was appointed director of this 

 new office. 



The supply division continued its efforts in the market place to pro- 

 cure the supplies, materials, and services needed in the many and 

 varied Smithsonian activities. Over 6,000 purchase orders were 

 issued for such diverse items as dehydrated fire-fly tails, lifesize manne- 

 quins, hardwood sawdust, and a newsboy's bag to be used by a scientist 

 to carry traps while in Africa. 



The Smithsonian benefitted from the highly effective property 

 utilization program of the General Services Administration. By 

 means of this program, material and equipment are transferred from 

 Government agencies where they are no longer required to other 

 agencies where they can be put to productive use, and thus additional 

 purchases are avoided. One million dollars worth of this property was 

 acquired by the Institution this year. It included $100,000 worth 

 of office furniture and equipment, and, for the the collections, a proto- 

 type Hawk missile launcher and the 29-foot, 6-ton U.S. Navy ex- 

 perimental hydrofoil craft Sea Legs, which will be placed on exhibit. 



In December 1965, after 47 yeai s of service to the Institution, Anthony 

 W. Wilding retired as chief of the supply division and in March 1966, 

 Fred G. Barwick was appointed chief. Mr. Barwick had previously 

 been a contract specialist with the Bureau of Ships, Department of 

 the Navy. 



341 




342 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



To meet the workload imposed by the payroll and other accounts 

 of the Institution, the fiscal division made increased use of automatic 

 data processing equipment, with its capability of fast and accurate 

 computations. 



As is evident by the preceding pages of this report, much of the 

 Institution's work is conducted overseas, so that foreign exchange rates 

 and overseas accounts add an international dimension as well as 

 challenging problems to the staff of the fiscal division. In this aspect 

 of the work, they were assisted greatly by the U.S. Treasury Depart- 

 ment and private banking concerns in Washington, D.C. 



The personnel division, in addition to processing over 3,200 person- 

 nel actions, conducted an active Incentive Awards Program, under 

 which 58 employees received cash awards totaling $5,230. Of par- 

 ticular significance was the suggestion to establish the Smithson 

 Medal for Scientific and Curatorial Excellence. Also, during this 

 period the Secretary approved the design for the new Henry Medal, 

 to be used by the Board of Regents to recognize distinguished service 

 or achievement. With the cooperation of its various bureaus, the 

 Institution provided practical training opportunities for disadvantaged 

 youth in the Metropolitan Area under the President's Youth Oppor- 

 tunity Program. Much of the credit for successful staffing and train- 

 ing programs can be given to the efforts and assistance of the Civil 

 Service Commission. 



With the general increase in exhibits, research, education, and 

 public services throughout the Smithsonian, the workload of the 

 photographic services division increased substantially. Approximately 

 184,000 black and white prints, color slides and other color photog- 

 raphy items, an increase of 45,000 over the previous year, were pro- 

 duced, as well as 21,000 feet of motion picture film. A particularly 

 important job performed by the photographers was the coverage 

 of the colorful Smithson Bicentennial. The resulting photographs, 

 slides, and motion pictures, which received wide distribution, provided 

 an exceptionally complete documentary of this significant and historic 

 occasion. 



Plans for constructing a photographic laboratory to service the 

 Oceanographic Sorting Center were approved, and this facility is 

 expected to be in operation during the coming fiscal year. 



The tasks assigned to the Smithsonian's buildings management 

 department are both large and particularly significant to the successful 

 meeting of the Smithsonian's goals. To this department is assigned 

 the broad responsibility of maintaining, operating, and improving the 

 buildings and associated equipment and other facilities, and of pro- 

 tecting these buildings, their irreplaceable contents, and the visiting 




ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT 343 



public. Much of this work is on an around-the-clock basis. An indi- 

 cation of its scope is provided by a few statistics: six monumental 

 buildings on the Mall and other significant properties in and around 

 Washington to be repaired, improved, and kept presentable; some 60 

 million objects of natural history, art, and scientific, technological, 

 and cultural significance to be protected; and over 13 million visitors 

 this year to be safeguarded and assisted. 



The department also participated in the installation of exhibits; 

 repaired and refurbished furniture, equipment, and museum objects; 

 it provided necessary supporting services for the curatorial, research, 

 and public sendee activities; and it conducted safety programs. 



Automatic data processing equipment holds a tremendous potential 

 for assisting in the curatorial and scientific areas as well as in certain 

 administrative areas. The full value of the information documenting 

 the collections cannot be realized until it can be captured, correlated, 

 and retrieved by means other than traditional manual methods. An 

 information systems division was established this year to design and 

 program the systems to meet these needs effectively and efficiently. 

 Nicholas J. Suszynski, Jr., who was appointed in November 1966 to 

 head this new division, brings to it ten years of ADP experience in a 

 variety of business management and scientific assignments. 



Other staff activities in the Office of the Secretary provided valuable 

 advisory and management assistance: The office of the general counsel, 

 the contracts office, the organization and methods division and the 

 internal audit office. The last named was established this year to 

 support the Smithsonian's continuing efforts to assure sound financial 

 management in all its aspects, and in March 1966 Douglas Martin 

 was appointed to implement this program by means of on-site reviews 

 and other techniques of fiscal analysis. 





Appendix 



1. REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF REGENTS 



OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 

 1966 



2. SMITHSONIAN FOREIGN CURRENCY PROGRAM GRANTS AWARDED, FISCAL 



YEAR 1966 



3. PUBLICATIONS OF THE SMITHSONIAN PRESS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 



JUNE 30, 1966 



4. MEMBERS OF THE SMITHSONIAN COUNCIL, JUNE 30, 1966 



5. RESEARCH PARTICIPATION PROGRAMS, APPOINTMENTS 1965-1966 



6. STAFF OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION, JUNE 30, 1966 



345 





1. 



Report of the Executive Committee of the Board of 

 Regents of the Smithsonian Institution 



For the Tear Ended June 30, 7966 



To the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution: 



Your executive committee respectfully submits the following report 

 in relation to the funds of the Smithsonian Institution, together with a 

 statement of the appropriations by Congress for the Government bu- 

 reaus in the administrative charge of the Institution. 



Parent Fund 



The original bequest of James Smithson was £104,960 8s 6d 

 ($508,318.46). Refunds of money expended in prosecution of the 

 claim, freight, insurance, and other incidental expenses, together 

 with payment into the fund of the sum of £5,015, which had been 

 withheld during the lifetime of Madame de la Batut, brought the 

 fund to the amount of $550,000. 



The gift of James Smithson was "lent to the United States Treasury, 

 at 6 per centum per annum interest" (20 U.S.C. 54) and by the Act 

 of March 12, 1894 (20 U.S.C. 55) the Secretary of the Treasury was 

 "authorized to receive into the Treasury, on the same terms as the 

 original bequest of James Smithson, such sums as the Regents may, 

 from time to time see fit to deposit, not exceeding, with the original 

 bequest the sum of $1,000,000." 



The maximum of $1,000,000 which the Smithsonian Institution 

 was authorized to deposit in the Treasury of the United States was 

 reached on January 11, 1917, by the deposit of $2,000. 



Under the above authority the amounts shown on the following page 

 are deposited in the United States Treasury and draw 6 percent interest. 



In addition to the $1,000,000 deposited in the Treasury of the United 

 States there has been accumulated from income and bequests the 

 sum of $7,314,088.20 which has been invested. Of this sum, 

 $6,232,813.25 is carried on the books of the Institution as the Con- 

 solidated Fund, a policy approved by the Regents at their meeting 

 on December 14, 1916. The balance is made up of several small 

 funds. 



347 




348 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Sources: Smithsonian Fund Deposited in 



Unrestricted 

 Donor funds 



James Smithson $727, 640 



Avery 14,000 



Habel 500 



Hamilton 2, 500 



Hodgkins (General) 1 16, 000 



Poore 26, 670 



Rhees 590 



Sanford 1, 100 



Restricted 



funds 



Hodgkins (Specific) $100, 000 



Reid 11,000 



Consolidated Fund 



[Income for the unrestricted use of the Institution] 



Investment 



Fund 1966 



Abbott, W. L., Special $24, 792 



* Avery, Robert S., and Lydia 65, 715 



Forrest, Robert Lee 1, 857, 275 



Gifts, royalties, gain on sale of securities 459, 354 



Goddard, Robert, Memorial Fund 15, 035 



Hachenberg, George P., and Caroline 6, 602 



*Hamilton, James 672 



Hart, Gustavus E 810 



Henry, Caroline 2, 012 



Henry, Joseph and Harriet A 81, 560 



Higbee, Harry, Memorial Fund 19, 459 



*Hodgkins, Thomas G. (General) 50, 397 



Morrow, Dwight W 128, 656 



Olmsted, Helen A 1, 333 



*Poore, Lucy T. and George W 270, 832 



Porter, Henry Kirke 476, 465 



*Rhees, William Jones 787 



*Sanford, George H 1, 481 



*Smithson, James 34, 61 1 



Taggart, Gansen 598 



Witherspoon, Thomas A 214, 697 



Total $3, 713, 143 



Income 

 1966 



$1,449 



3,777 



78,521 



26, 385 

 137 



41 



41 



46 



118 



4,708 



937 



2,897 



7,413 



76 



15, 802 



27, 368 



45 



85 



2,379 



43 



12. 331 



; 184, 599 



*In addition to funds deposited in the United States Treasury. 




report of the executive committee 349 



Consolidated Fund 



[Income restricted to specific use] 



Investment Income 



Fund 1966 1966 



Abbott, William L., for investigations in biology $173, 441 $9, 962 



Armstrong, Edwin James, for use of Department of 

 Invertebrate Paleontology when principal amounts 

 to $5,000.00 2, 518 



Arthur, James, for investigations and study of the sun 



and annual lecture on same 66, 537 



Bacon, Virginia Purdy, for traveling scholarship to 

 investigate fauna of countries other than the United 

 States 83, 352 



Baird, Lucy H., for creating a memorial to Secretary 



Baird 60, 975 



Barney, Alice Pike, for collection of paintings and pastels 

 and for encouragement of American artistic en- 

 deavors 47, 7 1 6 



Barstow, Frederick D., for purchase of animals for 



Zoological Park 1, 663 



Brown, Roland W., endowment fund — study, care, and 

 improvement of the Smithsonian paleobotanical 

 collections 54, 063 



Canfield collection, for increase and care of the Canfield 



collection of minerals 63, 774 



Casey, Thomas L., for maintenance of the Casey collec- 

 tion and promotion of researches relating to Cole- 

 optera 20, 853 



Chamberlain, Francis Lea, for increase and promotion 



of Isaac Lea Collection of gems and mollusks 46, 850 



Division of Mammals Curators Fund, for support of 



scientific purposes 3, 308 



Dykes, Charles, for support in financial research 71, 627 



Eickemeyer, Florence Brevoort, for preservation and 

 exhibition of the photographic collection of Rudolph 

 Eickemeyer, Jr 18, 083 1, 038 



Guggenheim, David and Florence, Foundation for a 

 commemorative Guggenheim Exhibit, an annual 

 Daniel Guggenheim Lecture, and annual Guggen- 

 heim Fellowships for graduate students for research 

 at the National Air Museum 50, 539 1, 121 



Hanson, Martin Gustav and Caroline Runice, for some 

 scientific work of the Institutian, preferably in 

 chemistry or medicine 14, 790 850 



Higbee, Harry, income for general use of the Smith- 

 sonian Institution after June 11, 1967 977 20 



Hillyer, Virgil, for increase and care of Virgil Hillyer 



collection of lighting objects 10, 934 628 



Hitchcock, Albert S., for care of the Hitchcock Agro- 



stological Library 2, 626 153 



230-457— 66— —29 




350 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Consolidated Fund — Continued 



Investment Income 



Fund 1966 1966 



Hrdlicka, Ales and Marie, to further researches in 



physical anthropology and publication in connec- 

 tion therewith $100, 812 $4, 812 



Hughes, Bruce, to found Hughes alcove 31, 845 1, 831 



Johnson, E. R. Fenimore, research in underwater 



photography 13, 927 



Loeb, Morris, for furtherance of knowledge in the 



exact sciences 145, 031 



Long, Annette and Edith C, for upkeep and preservation 



of Long collection ot embroideries, laces, and 



textiles 904 



Maxwell, Mary E., for care and exhibition of Maxwell 



collection 32, 632 



Myer, Catherine Walden, for purchase of first-class 



works of art for use and benefit of the National 



Collection of Fine Arts 33, 605 



Nelson, Edward W., for support of biological studies. . . 39, 559 



Noyes, Frank B., for use in connection with the collection 



of dolls placed in the U.S. National Museum through 



the interest of and Mr. Mrs. Noyes 1, 600 



Pell, Cornelia Livingston, for maintenance of Alfred 



Duane Pell collection 12, 333 



Petrocelli, Joseph, for the care of the Petrocelli collection 



of photographic prints and for the enlargement and 



development of the section of photography of the 



U.S. National Museum 12, 334 



Rathbun, Richard, for use of division of U.S. National 



Museum containing Crustacea 17, 696 



*Reid, Addison T., for founding chair in biology, in 



memory of Asher Tunis 29, 592 



Roebling Collection, for care, improvement, and increase 



of Roebling collection of minerals 200, 785 



Roebling Solar Research 41, 668 



Rollins, Miriam and William, for investigations in 



physics and chemistry 259, 965 



Smithsonian employees' retirement 5, 525 



Smithsonian Institution and THF 7, 623 



Sprague Fund for the advancement of the physical 



sciences 1 , 780, 760 



Springer, Frank, for care and increase of the Springer 



collection and library 29, 834 



Stevenson, John A., Mycological Library Fund, for care, 



maintenance, and additions to the library 10, 002 



Strong, Julia D., for benefit of the National Collection 



of Fine Arts 16, 635 



Walcott, Charles D. and Mary Vaux, for development 



of geological and paleontological studies and 



publishing results of same 932, 217 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 351 



Consolidatfe Fund — Continued 



Fund 

 Walcott, Mary Vaux, for publication in botany. . . . 

 Zerbee, Francis Brinckle, for endowment of aquaria . 



Total $4, 649, 339 $1 74, 548 



*In addition to funds deposited in the United States Treasury. 



Freer Gallery of Art Fund 



Early in 1906, by deed of gift, Charles L. Freer, of Detroit, gave to 

 the Institution his collection of Chinese and other Oriental objects of 

 art, as well as paintings, etchings, and other works of art by Whistler, 

 Thayer, Dewing, and other artists. Later he also gave funds for con- 

 struction of a building to house the collection, and finally in his will, 

 probated November 6, 1919, he provided stocks and securities to the 

 estimated value of $1,958,591 as an endowment fund for the operation 

 of the Gallery. The fund now amounts to $11,605,036. 



Summary of Endowments 



Invested endowment for general purposes $5, 879, 442 



Invested endowment for specific purposes other than Freer endow- 

 ment 5, 100, 950 



Total invested endowment other than Freer 10, 980, 392 



Freer invested endowment for specific purposes 11,605,036 



Total invested endowment for all purposes $22, 585, 428 



Classification of Investments 



Deposited in the U.S. Treasury at 6 percent per annum, as authorized 



in the U.S. Revised Statutes, sec. 5591 $1,000,000 



Investments other than Freer endowment (cost or market value at 

 date acquired) : 



Bonds $3, 570, 000 



Stocks 4,517,280 



Real estate and mortgages 1,614,588 



Uninvested capital 278, 524 9, 980, 392 



Total investments other than Freer endowment . 10, 980, 392 




352 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Investments of Freer endowment (cost or market value 

 at date acquired) : 



Bonds $6, 720, 045 



Stocks 4, 884, 784 



Uninvested capital 207 $11,605,036 



Total investments $22, 585, 428 



Gifts, Grants, and Bequests 

 The Smithsonian institution gratefully acknowledges gifts, grants, 

 and bequests from the following : 



American Heritage Publishing Co., Inc.: Grant to create and publish a series of 



books under the overall title of the Smithsonian Library. 

 American Petroleum Institute : Grant for research entitled The Crustose Corallines 



of the North Atlantic. 

 Anonymous donor : Gift for the American Association of Physical Anthropologists 



Conference at Berkeley, California. 

 Anonymous donor: Gift for the department of botany. 

 Archbold Foundation: Grant for the support of research entitled Biological 



Survey of Dominica Project. 

 Atomic Energy Commission : Additional grant for research entitled A Study of the 

 Biochemical Effects of Ionizing and Nonionizing Radiation of Plant Metabolism During 

 Development. 

 Charles and Rosanna Batchelor Memorial Inc. : Gift for the purpose of 



improving the Emma E. Batchelor stamp collection. 

 Buffalo Bill Memorial Association: Gift to help support the Smithsonian In- 

 stitution-National Park Service-Whitney Gallery excavations at Mummy Cave, 

 Wyoming. 

 Hardy Jefferson Bowen: Grant entitled Bowen Andros Expedition. 

 Bredin Foundation : Grant for the support of research entitled Biological Survey of 



Dominica Project. 

 Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Campbell: Gift to the Zoo Animal Fund. 

 Coca-Cola Company : Gift to the division of medical sciences. 

 Conservation Foundation: Grant to support Conference on Avifauna of North- 

 ern Latin America. 

 Joanne T. Cummings : Gift for the purpose of acquiring ceramics and glass. 

 Charles Darwin Foundation : Gift for the support of research and conservation in 



the Galapagos Islands. 

 Department of the Air Force : Grant for research entitled Chemical Analysis of 

 Chrondrite Meteorites. 

 Additional grant for studies directed toward the development of a technique for 

 measuring wind speed and direction at heights using ionized paths generated 

 by meteors. 

 Additional grants for the support of research entitled Researches — Molecular 



Collisions. 

 Additional grant for research directed toward the study of stellar scintillation. 

 Additional grant for the study of Atmospheric Entry and Impact of High Velocity 

 Meteorites. 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 353 



Additional grant for research directed toward the studies of rate of accretion of 



interplanetary matter by the earth. 

 Additional grant for research directed toward providing a program for deter- 

 mination of satellite density data. 

 Department of Army: Grants for the support of research entitled Potential Vectors 

 and Reservoirs of Disease in Greece and Central and South Africa; Gold Flash; and 

 Ecology and Distribution of Mammalian Ectoparasites, Arboviruses, and Their Hosts in 

 Venezuela. 

 Additional grants for the support of research entitled Studies of the Mosquitoes of 

 Southeast Asia and Potential Vectors and Reservoirs of Disease in Strategic Overseas 

 Area; also for support of research on the analysis of bird migration in the 

 Pacific area and the study of the ecology of birds and mammals on one or 

 more Pacific Islands. 

 Department of Commerce: Grant to identify and develop economic opportunities 



and employment potential in craft industries. 

 Department of Health, Education, and Welfare: Grant for planning experi- 

 mental museum exhibits for the blind. Grant for study of parasites of Philippine 

 fishes. 



Department of the Interior: Grants for support of research entitled Indexing 

 Vocabulary for Publication by the Office of Water Resources Research and Sorting of 

 Plankton Samples from Geronimo; and to provide services to sub-sample plankton 

 samples from the International Indian Ocean Expedition. 

 Additional grants for the support of research entitled Tropical Fishes and Con- 

 tinuation of a Review of the General and American Species of the Shrimp Family 

 Penaeidae; also for the purpose in the preparation of camera-ready copy of 

 research data suitable for photocopying and printing as a current Water 

 Resources Research Catalog. 

 Department of State: Grant for Mr. Joseph F. K. Acquaye, assistant curator 



of the Ghana National Science Museum. 

 Ford Foundation: Grant to purchase land on the Chesapeake Bay known as 



Ivy Neck. 

 Ford Motor Company: Gift in support of the model foundry for the iron and steel 



hall. 

 General Precision, Inc. : Gift to the Link Prolonged and Deep Submergence 



Study Program Fund. 

 Julius W. Gilbert: Gift to the Joanne Toor Cummings Fund. 

 C. M. Goethe: Gift to the Barro Colorado Island Fund. 

 Mayer and Ruth Greenberg Foundation: Gift to the division of ceramics and 



glass. 

 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foundation: Addition to the grant for the 

 establishment of a Commemorative Guggenheim Exhibit, an Annual Guggen- 

 heim Lecture, and Annual Guggenheim Fellowships for graduate students, for 

 research at the National Air Museum. 

 Harvard University: Grants for the engineering services to Harvard University 

 and for the support to Harvard University for the transportation of an 84-foot 

 radiotelescope. 

 Humble Companies Charitable Trust: Gift for reconstructing the fluid catalytic 



cracking unit model for the hall of petroleum. 

 International Business Machines Corp.: Gift to cover expenses on Smithsonian 



Film. 

 Felix and Helen Juda Foundation: Gift to the Freer Gallery of Art for the pur- 

 chase of collections. 




354 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Otto Kallir : Gift for the purchase of the lithograph Seeds for Sowing May Mot 

 be Milled. 



Kaudus Charitable Trust: Gift to further the work of the National Portrait 

 Gallery. 



Kevorkian Foundation: Gifts to the Freer Gallery of Art Library; to the Freer 

 Gallery of Art for the publication of Ganhara frieze in the form of a picture 

 book; and to the Freer Gallery of Art Library for purchasing books dealing with 

 Near Eastern art. 



Elsie and William Knight Foundation: Grant to the Stazione Zoologica. 



Dorothy V. Lee : Gift for the support of research and conservation in the Galapa- 

 gos Islands. 



Link Foundation: Gift for the 1966 Edwin A. Link Lecture. 



Marilyn C. Link : Grant to support the publication of a biographical booklet on 

 James Smithson. 



Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer Foundation : Gift toward the costs of the program 

 to provide for greater use of Smithsonian museum exhibits in the District schools. 



National Academy of Sciences: Gift to defray travel expenses to Monks Wood, 

 England. 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration: Grants for the support of 

 research projects entitled: Symposium on Meteoritic Orbits and Dusts; Exobiology and 

 Origin of Life; Photoelectric Techniques for Measurement of Earthshine; Data Analyses 

 in Connection with the National Geodetic Satellite Program; A Survey of the Influx Rates 

 of the Major Meteor Streams; and High-Energy Gamma-Ray Astronomy Experiment for 

 High-Altitude Balloons. 

 Additional grants for the support of research entitled Optical and Radar In- 

 vestigation of Simulated and Natural Meteors; Textures of Meteorites; and Optical 

 Satellite Tracking Program; also for research of the systematic recovery of 

 meteorites and the photography of meteorites in flight; for an investigation 

 and collection of meteorites, tektites, and related materials; and for the 

 scientific and engineering study for instrumenting and orbiting telescope. 



National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities : Grant for organizing and to 

 present a major display representative of contemporary American painting. 



National Geographic Society: Grants for support of research entitled Bermuda 

 Underwater Archeological Expedition; also for the study of Mollusks on Polynesia 

 and Melanesia and for the Seabird Colonies project. Gift to Freer Gallery of 

 Art for publications. 



National Science Foundation: Additional grants for the support of research 

 projects entitled: Early Tertiary Mammals of North America; Mammals of the South- 

 eastern United States; Botanical Exploration on Southern Brazil; Revisionary Study of 

 Blattoidea; Morphology and Paleoecology of Permian Brachiopods of the Glass Mountain, 

 Texas; South Asian Microlepidoptera, particularly the Philippine Series; Taxonomy of 

 Bamboos; Lower Cretaceous Ostracoda of Israel; Marine Mollusks of Polynesia; Tertiary 

 Echiniods of the Eastern United States and the Caribbean; Zoogeography of Southern Ocean 

 Sclearactinian Coral Faunas; The American Commensal Crabs of the Family Pinnotheridae; 

 Indo- Australian Vespidae sens. lat. and Specidae; Revision of Genera of Paleozoic Bryozoa; 

 Monographic Studies of the Tingidae of the World; Study of Type Specimens of Ferns in 

 European Herbaria; Polychaetous Annelids of New England; The Phanerogams of Colombia; 

 Revision of Scarab Beetles of the Genus Ataenius; Geographic Variation in the Inter- 

 specific Relations among certain Andean Passeriformes; Systemic Studies of the Archidaceae, 

 Subtribe Epidendrinae; A Monograph of the Stomatopod Crustaceans of the Western Atlantic; 

 Recording of Data for Specimens Collected during the U.S. Antarctic Program; Distribution 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 355 



of North America Calanoid and Harpacticoid Copepoda; Collection of Meteorites and Tek- 

 tites in Australia; Installation of Power Line to Barro Colorado from Mainland; Upper 

 Cretaceous Inoceraminae in North America and Western Europe; Environment of Permo- 

 Triassic Reptiles of the Order Therapsida in South Africa; Taxonomic and Biological 

 Studies of Neotropical Water Beetles; Evolution and Distribution of Parmelia in Eastern Asia 

 and Pacific; Taconomic Studies of the Family Stenomidae in Neotropical Region; Pre- 

 Industrial System of Water Management in Arid Region; Revisionary Stiudies in the Chilopoda; 

 Photographic Investigation of Comets; Purchase of the Hood Collection of Thrips, Archaeo- 

 logical Survey of Southwestern Kansas; Science Information Exchange; Taxonomic and 

 Biological Studies on Central American Caddisflies; Identification Guide to Antarctic Birds; 

 Ostracoda of the Indian Ocean; Sorting of Collection from the U.S. Antarctic Research 

 Program; Sorting of Collections from the International Indian Ocean Expedition; Systematic; 

 of the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic Gemmaridean Amphipods; Eltanin Cruise Participations; 

 Stellar Atmospheres; Comparative Study of Molluscan Faunas of Tertiary Stages; The 

 Mammals of Panama; Systematics of Stomiatoid Fishes; Cooperative Systematics Studies in 

 Antarctic Biology; Undergraduate Research Participation Program; Purchase of the Carl 

 Bosch Research Collection of Minerals and Meteorites; and Bibliography of Termites. 



Office of Naval Research: Additional grants for the support of research entitled: 

 Information of Shark Distribution and Distribution of Shark Attack All Over the World; 

 Conduct Research on the Medusae and Related Organisms From the Indian Ocean Collec- 

 tion; Studies of the Ecology, Distribution and Classification of South American Birds; 

 Distribution of Formaminifera in the Eastern Tropical Atlantic; and The Formation of 

 Spectrum Lines. Also, to provide expert consultants to advise the Navy Advisory 

 Committee, and to perform psychological research studies. 



Marjorie Merriweather Post: Gift to defray travel expenses of Marvin Ross. 



Rosser Reeves, Ted Bates and Company: Gift for the purchase of insurance for 

 the Rosser Reeves Ruby. 



Dorothy B. Rothschild: Gift to the Joanne Toor Cummings Fund. 



Shirley Latter Schlesinger: Contribution to the National Collection of Fine 

 Arts to be entitled "Cassatt Research Fund." 



Ansel Schoeneman: Gift for the purchase of an 18th-century, earthenware, 

 English figure of the Duke of Cumberland. 



St. Petersburg Shell Company: Grant for the St. Petersburg Shell Company 

 Fund. 



Society for a More Beautiful National Capital Inc. : Gift for landscaping the 

 entrance to the National Zoo. 



Spraque Fund : Bequest of the late Joseph White Spraque to establish a fund for 

 the advancement of the physical sciences. 



E. R. Squibb and Sons: Gift to the division of medical sciences. 



John A. Stevenson: Gift of the John A. Stevenson Mycological Library and a gift 

 for care and maintenance and making additions thereto. 



Sydney Printing and Publishing Company: Grant for the purchase of U.S. coins. 



United States Information Agency: Grant to undertake complete responsibility 

 of the Agency's Fine Arts exhibits activity. 



United States Steel Corp.: Grant to defray the cost of a model of an integrated 

 steel plant. 



University of Michigan: Gift to Freer Gallery of Art for the Ars Orientalis Fund. 



G. Unger Vetlesen Foundation: Grant to assist in studying flora and other 

 terrestial and marine fauna in Australia. 



Lila Acheson Wallace: Contribution for expenses in connection with Sym- 

 posiums for Department of Civil History. 




356 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Washington Biologists' Field Club: Grant for the purpose of defraying the 



costs of the publication of the work Trapnesting Wasps and Bees. 

 Washington Fashion Group: Gift to the Historic Dresses Fund. 

 Ellen Bayard Weedon Foundation: Gift to the Freer Gallery of Art for the 



Library Fund. 

 Wenonah Development Company: Contribution to the Kathryn and Gilbert 



Miller Fund. 

 Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution: Grant for participation of five 



Smithsonian staff members in cruises of the Anton Bruun in the Eastern Pacific 



Ocean. 

 Charles M. Wormser: Gift to the Moritz Wormser Memorial Collection. 



The Smithsonian Institution gratefully acknowledges gifts, for the 

 special purposes indicated, from the following: 



For the Carl Bosch Collection Fund: 



Gem Lapidary and Mineral Society of Standard Oil Company of New Jersey 



Montgomery County. American Metal Climax Foundation 



Mineralogical Society of the District of Incorporated 



Columbia. Foundation of Litton Industries 



Yale University Consolidation Coal Company 



Franklin Ogdensburg Mineralogical Lockheed Aircraft Corporation 

 Society 



Xerox Fund 



For the Division of Mammals Curators Fund: 



David H. Johnson Gerrit S. Miller, Jr. 



Remington Kellogg 



For the purpose of the S. D. Heron Memorial Fund: 



Anonymous donor Harold S. Morehouse 



A. E. Felt J. H. Stern 



For the purpose of the Smithsonian Bicentennial Ceremony: 



Burlington Industries Foundation Wilmarth S. Lewis 



W. R. Burgess Martha I. Love 



Austin B. Chinn Charles Nagel 



Ben Gray Marjorie Merriweather Post 



For the purpose of the Smithson Bicentennial Celebration: 



Anonymous Eastern Airlines, Inc. 



Bethlehem Steel Corp. Eastman Kodak Co. 



Bibb Manufacturing Co. The Equitable Life Assurance Society 



Burrough Corp. Evening Star 



Carrier Corp. Electro-Optical Systems 



Certain-teed Products Corp. Ex-Cell-O-Corporation 



Connecticut Printer Fisher Scientific Co. 



John Deere Foundation General Aniline and Film Corp. 



R. R. Donnelly and Sons Co. General Dynamics Corp. 



Douglas Aircraft General Precision Equipment Corp. 



Dumbarton Oaks Goodwill Ambassador 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



357 



Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. 



I. B. M. Corp. 



William W. Johnson 



C. O. Kienbusch 



Kresge Foundation 



Link Foundation 



Lockheed Aircraft Corp. 



David McKay 



Martin Co. 



The Magnavox Co. 



The Maytag Co. 



Majorie Merriweather Post 



The Merck Company Foundation 



Philadelphia Inquirer 



Reader's Digest 



Revell, Inc. 



Scholastic Magazine, Inc. 



Southern Railway System 



Alfred P. Sloan 



Time, Inc. 



United Aircraft Corp. 



United States Steel Foundation, Inc. 



Washington Post 



Westinghouse Electric Corp. 



For the purpose of the Venice Biennale Fund: 



Mrs. Dean Acheson 



Mrs. Philip Barry 



Mr. Harvey Baskin 



Mrs. and Mrs. John Begg 



Mr. and Mrs. Melvin Belman 



Dr. and Mrs. Edgar F. Berman 



Mr. Leo M. Bernstein 



Mr. and Mrs. Norman Bernstein 



Mr. William McCormick Blair 



Mr. Jacob Blaustein 



Mr. and Mrs. Huntington Block 



Mr. and Mrs. Richard Borwick 



Mrs. Edith Bralove 



Mr. and Mrs. Abner Brenner 



Dr. Iving Brotman 



Mr. J. Carter Brown 



Mr. John Bucknell 



Mrs. Douglas Burden 



Mr. and Mrs. S. Carter Burden 



Mr. William A. M. Burene 



Mrs. Morris Cafritz 



Mrs. Calvert Carey 



Mr. Aldus Chapin 



Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Chapman 



Mr. and Mrs. Marcus Cohn 



The Honorable and Mrs. John T. 



Connor 

 Miss Edith Newman Cook 

 Mr. Gardner Cowles 

 Crown-Zellerbach Foundation 

 Mrs. Gertrude d'Amecourt 

 The Honorable and Mrs. C. Douglas 



Dillon 

 Miss Barbara Donald 

 Mr. and Mrs. Robert B. Eichholz 

 Mr. Milton Elsberg 

 Dr. and Mrs. Richard Ettinghausen 

 Mr. and Mrs. David E. Finley 



Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence A. Fleischman 



The Honorable and Mrs. Clifford Folger 



Forage Foundation, Inc. 



Mrs. Elizabeth J. Foy 



Mr. and Mrs. Carl M. Freeman 



The Honorable and Mrs. Peter H. B. 



Frelinghuysen 

 Mr. and Mrs. B. H. Friedman 

 Mrs. J. William Fullbright 

 Mr. Richard E. Fuller 

 Mr. Wreathan E. Gathright 

 Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Geldzahler 

 Mr. Ira Gershwin 

 Mr. Roland Gibson 

 Mr. and Mrs. Mackensie Gordon 

 Mrs. Philip L. Graham 

 Miss Jacqueline Greber 

 Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Hahn, Jr. 

 Mrs. W. Averill Harriman 

 Mr. E. David Harrison 

 Mr. and Mrs. John Hechinger 

 Mr. Henry H. Hecht, Jr. 

 Mr. Ernest Hillman, Jr. 

 Mr. Barnet Hodes 

 Mrs. Arthur U. Hooper 

 Mr. and Mrs. David Jay Hyman 

 Dr. and Mrs. John M. Ide 

 I. F. A. Galleries, Inc. 

 Industrial Union Department 

 AFL-CIO 

 Dr. H. W. Janson 

 Mr. and Mrs. Maxey Jarman 

 The Honorable Jacob K. Javits 

 Mrs. J. Lee Johnson, III 

 Captain and Mrs. Francois C. B. 



Jordan 

 Mr. Garfield I. Kass 

 Mrs. Estes Kefauver 




358 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Mrs. Fenwick Keyser 



Mrs. Robert Kintner 



Mrs. GraemeKorff 



Mr. and Mrs. David Lloyd Kreeger 



Mr. Sigmund Junstadter 



Mr. Irving Levick 



Dr. and Mrs. Alec C. Levin 



Mr. and Mrs. Jerome P. Lewis 



Mr. and Mrs. Sidney Lewis 



Mr. John L. Loeb, Jr. 



Mr. and Mrs. Walter C. Louchheim, Jr. 



Mr. Georg S. T. Maisel, III 



Mr. Stanley Marcus 



Mr. Henry A. Markus 



Mr. Morton May 



Mr. Robert B. Mayer 



Mr. Stephen Mazoh 



Mr. and Mrs. William S. McCornick 



Mr. Henry P. Mcllhenny 



The Honorable and Mrs. Robert S. 



McNamara 

 Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon 

 Mr. and Mrs. Cord Meyer, Jr. 

 Mr. and Mrs. Robert E. MeyerhofF 

 Mrs. Paul Moore 

 The Honorable and Mrs. William S. 



Moorhead 

 Mr. and Mrs. Edward P. Morgan 

 Philip Morris International 

 Mr. Charles Nagel 

 Mrs. David Halle 

 Mr. and Mrs. Roy R. Neuberger 

 Mr. Gerson Nordlinger, Jr. 

 Miss Anna Belle O'Brien 

 Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Ottenstein 

 Mr. and Mrs. Maxwell Oxman 

 Mrs. Tompkins Parker 

 Mr. Robert E. Phinney, Jr. 

 Mr. Abe Pollin 

 Mrs. S. Prentice Porter 

 Mrs. Merriweather Post 

 Mr. Gustave Ring 

 Mr. Laurance S. Rockefeller 



Samuel and David Rose Fund, Inc. 



Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Ross 



Mr. William M. Roth 



Mrs. Seymour J. Rubin 



Mrs. Henry P. Russell 



Mrs. Serge Sacknoff 



Mr. and Mrs. Walter Salant 



Dr. and Mrs. Stanley J. Sarnoff 



Rita and Taft Schreiber Foundation 



Mrs. John Farr Simmons 



Skidmore, Owings and Merrill 



Mr. and Mrs. Albert H. Small 



Mr. and Mrs. Charles E. Smith 



Mr. L. M. C. Smith 



Mr. and Mrs. Stephen E. Smith 



Miss Laura Steinbach 



Mr. and Mrs. Philip Stern 



Mrs. Donald B. Straus 



Mrs. Madeleine S. Sundlun 



Mr. and Mrs. Carleton Byron Swift 



Mrs. Fredrika M. Tandler 



Walter Dorwin Teague Associates 



Mr. and Mrs. Edward Russell True, Jr. 



Mr. and Mrs. Bayard Underwood 



Mr. and Mrs. T. Graydon Upton 



Mr. and Mrs. Julius Wadsworth 



Mrs. C. Law Watkins 



Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 



Mrs. Vanderbilt Webb 



Dr. and Mrs. Paul S. Weisberg 



Mr. and Mrs. Eric Wentworth 



Dr. and Mrs. Sidney Werkman 



Mr. and Mrs. Kurt Wiener 



Mrs. J. Burke Wilkenson 



Mrs. Earle Kress Williams 



Mr. and Mrs. Anthony Wilson 



Mr. Howard Wise 



Mrs. Frank G. Wisner 



The Honorable and Mrs. Stanley 



Woodward 

 Xerox Corporation 

 Mr. and Mrs. Jacob Zettlin 

 Mr. and Mrs. Sidney S. Zlotnick 




report of the executive committee 359 



Funds and Federal Appropriations 



The following appropriations were made by Congress for the Govern- 

 ment bureaus under the administrative charge of the Smithsonian 

 Institution for the fiscal year 1966: 



Salaries and Expenses $18,921,000 



National Zoological Park $1,832,000 



The appropriation made to the National Gallery of Art (which is a 

 bureau of the Smithsonian Institution under a separate Board of 

 Trustees) was $2,531,000 



The Institution also received appropriations to continue the 12-year 

 capital improvement program at the National Zoological Park 

 ($1,539,000); and for the restoration and renovation of buildings 

 ($2,248,000). 



For fiscal year 1966, the Smithsonian was granted an appropriation 

 of $1,300,000 in foreign currencies for museum programs and related 

 research. 



In addition, funds were transferred from other Government agencies 

 for expenditure under the direction of the Smithsonian Institution as 

 follows : 



Working funds, transferred from the National Park Service, Depart- 

 ment of the Interior, for archeological investigations in river basins 

 throughout the United States $221,000 



The Institution also administers a trust fund for partial support of the 

 Canal Zone Biological Area, located on Barro Colorado Island in the 

 Canal Zone. 



Audit 

 The report of the audit of the Smithsonian Private Funds is attached. 



Respectfully submitted: 



Robert V. Fleming 

 Caryl P. Haskins 

 Clinton P. Anderson 

 Executive Committee. 



Washington, D.C., October 7, 1966 





REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 361 



Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & Co. 



ACCOUNTANTS AND AUDITORS 



1730 M STREET, NW. 



WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 



THE BOARD OF REGENTS, 

 SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION, 



We have examined the balance sheet of private funds of Smithsonian Insti- 

 tution as of June 30, 1966, and the related statements of changes in funds 

 for the year then ended. Our examination was made in accordance with 

 generally accepted auditing standards, and accordingly included such tests of 

 the accounting records and such other auditing procedures as we considered 

 necessary in the circumstances. 



Except for certain real estate acquired by gift or purchased from proceeds 

 of gifts which are valued at cost or appraised value at date of gift, land, build- 

 ings, furniture, equipment, works of art, living and other specimens and certain 

 other similar property are not included in the accounts of the Institution; 

 the amounts of investments in such properties are not readily determinable. 

 Current expenditures for such properties are included among expenses. 

 The accompanying statements do not include the National Gallery of Art, the 

 John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts nor other departments, 

 bureaus and operations administered by the Institution under Federal Appro- 

 priations. The accounts of the Institution are maintained on the basis of cash 

 receipts and disbursements, with the result that the accompanying statements 

 do not reflect income earned but not collected or expenses incurred but not paid. 



In our opinion, subject to the matters referred to in the preceding paragraph, 

 the accompanying balance sheet of private funds and the related statements of 

 changes in funds present fairly the assets and funds principal of Smithsonian 

 Institution at June 30, 1966 and changes in fund balances resulting from cash 

 transactions of the private funds for the year then ended, on a basis consistent 

 with that of the preceding year. 



PEAT, MARWICK, MITCHELL & CO. 



October 7, 1966 



In the Auditor's report, the following statement precedes schedules 1 

 and 2: 



Accountants'' Report on Supplementary Data 



We have reported separately herein on the basic financial statements of pri- 

 vate funds of Smithsonian Institution. The current year's supplementary data 

 included in Schedules 1-2 were subjected to the same auditing procedures and, 

 in our opinion, are stated fairly in all material respects when considered in 

 conjunction with the basic financial statements taken as a whole. 




362 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Smithsonian 

 BALANCE SHEET OF PRIVATE 



Assets 

 Current funds: 

 General : 

 Cash: 

 United States Treasury current 



account $334, 369 



In banks and on hand 336, 881 



671, 250 



Investments — stocks and bonds 



(quoted market value $2,709,- 



440.00) (note 1) 2,863,780 



Contract reimbursements due 556, 951 



Travel and other advances 70, 777 



Total general funds 4, 162, 758 



Restricted : 



Cash: 



United States Treasury current 

 account $670,413 



In banks 147, 007 



Due from general fund 999, 279 



Due from Freer endowment fund 2, 076 



Total restricted funds 1,818,775 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 363 



EXHIBIT A 



Institution 



FUNDS, JUNE 30, 1966 



Fund Balances 

 Current funds: 

 General : 

 Due to restricted funds $999, 279 



Unexpended funds — unrestricted 



(Exhibit B) 3,163,479 




364 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Assets — Continued 



Total current funds $5,981,533 



Endowment funds and funds functioning 

 as endowment: 

 Freer Gallery of Art Fund: 

 Cash $207 



Stocks and bonds (quoted market 



value $17,009,713.00) (note 1) 11, 604, 829 



Total Freer Gallery of Art fund 1 1, 605, 036 



Other funds: 

 Cash $278, 524 



Stocks and bonds (quoted market 



value $9,139,617.00) (note 1) 8, 083, 958 



8, 362, 482 

 Loan to United States Treasury 1, 000, 000 



Other stocks and bonds (quoted 



market value $ 1 2,404.00) (note 1 ) 3,322 



Real estate (note 2) 1, 614, 588 



Total other funds 10, 980, 392 



Total endowment funds and 

 funds functioning as endow- 

 ment 22, 585, 428 



$28,566,961 



See accompanying notes to financial statements. 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



365 



Fund Balances — Continued 



Total current funds 

 Endowment funds and funds function- 

 ing as endowment (Exhibit D) : 

 Freer Gallery of Art fund : 

 Due to Freer restricted fund 

 Principal of fund 

 (Exhibit D) 

 Total Freer Gallery of Art 

 fund 

 Other funds: 

 Mortgages payable (note 2) 

 Principal of funds 

 (Exhibit D) : 

 Restricted $4, 878, 667 



General 5, 879, 442 



$5, 981, 533 



$2, 076 

 11,602,960 



11,605,036 



$222, 283 



10, 758, 109 



Total other funds 



Total endowment funds and 

 funds functioning as endow- 

 ment 



10, 980, 392 



22, 585, 428 

 $28, 566, 961 



230-457 — 66- 



-30 




366 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



H 



PQ 



X 



O 



< 

 < 



Q 



Si 8 



»-< O v* 



< 



■■s-s ^' 



<a ^N lO 



2 <" 



CO 



co 



so b fl lO 



-2.1 ^co" 



<§& *» 



O •* r-» r}- 



cv ct> r^ to 



— > to CM 



r^ oo 



— o 



«-> « £ c 



00OU 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



367 



U 



H 



i— i 



m 

 i— i 



ffl 



X 



t-i <N 



cm ct> CT) r^ o •* -i -h 

 onoiioocNin-i 

 Ncomoajiooio 



p-T in ^ aT t^" cm to" co" 



CMCOCOCO— iCMlOCM 



to -h - r^ cm m 



Q 

 Z 



5 



Pn 



H 

 < 

 > 



2 



Oh 



Z 



O 



H 



Z 



< 



z 

 o 



K 

 H 



S 

 GO 



U 



< 

 h-1 

 < 

 pq 



Q 



P 



p 



H 



O 

 »— i 



P* 



H to 



c4 



o 

 H 

 55 



H 



P* 



o 



</5 



< 

 o 



fin 

 O 



H 



*. 



a 



tC 



tO 

 CM 

 </3- 



o 



35 



r* <*-" 

 O W- 



ct> 

 o 



05 to 



t}- CO tJ< 

 CO CT) CM 



i>» >— < m 



CM CT) g CO CO 



o co S I s * co 



CM CO ^ CM tO 



— " in" :J co — " 



cm co cc co — ■ 



H 

 < 

 H 



c/3 




368 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



U 



H 



3 



s 



£ 



«, 



eooiom^ai^r^o 

 o-ocoo(D't'*n 



co m 

 cn — . 



CO CO 



E «j 



£ s 



-a -2 > 



o 



o^ 



s n " ^ 



U <U U flj 



— «J 

 3 =2 



o O 



.a 3-s 



C • C o g G 



S W ^« W ^ ft «j <3 



«hOPOO?OOU 



u 



o- E 



I -a || 2 9 



„ c £ w • - o u 

 « o 3 *■" be u bo 



,w a o O O O o 



s«hhhHh 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



369 



c >- 



■b o 



pq 




370 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



EXHIBIT D 



Smithsonian Institution 



PRIVATE FUNDS 



STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN PRINCIPAL OF ENDOWMENT FUNDS 



AND FUNDS FUNCTIONING AS ENDOWMENT 



YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 1966 



Balance at beginning of year $19, 659, 589 



Add: 



Gifts and bequests 2, 009, 451 



Income added to principal as prescribed by donor 20, 890 



Transfer from gifts for investment 350, 899 



Net gain on investments 320, 240 



Balance at end of year 22, 361, 069 



Balance at end of year consisting of: 



Freer Gallery of Art 11, 602, 960 



Other : 



Restricted 4, 878, 667 



General 5, 879, 442 



$22, 361, 069 



Smithsonian Institution 

 NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

 JUNE 30, 1966 



(1) Investments are stated at cost or appraised value at date of gift. 



(2) During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1966, the Institution acquired by gift, 

 bequest or purchase, property subject to existing mortgages. At June 30, 1966 

 there were three parcels of property pledged as security for mortgages with unpaid 

 balances totaling $222,283. 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



371 



Q 



!H 

 o 



CO 



c-i m 



<3 



CD -te> 



- e5 



co — m co co 



to" crT Tt"" o" t~-T 



co o co in co 



— i to 



CD CM — CM CO 



t~« in CD Tf rj- 



co — in to co 



to" cd" •*" co i-~-" 



co o co m co 

 — co 



« ~° 



•S ° £ 



O ^ JJ 



o c O 



V £ 



^ -g 



c W 



fa O 




372 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 



Q 



o 



t/3 



G) O Ci CO 

 ■* «D CO CD 

 CO CM CM Ol 



£ 



O 



^ CO CO 



co lo io 

 •* <y> o 



"C 



CM CO -h 

 CO CM CO 

 CM CM LO 



z p4 § 



w Ph td 



§ Ph [VI 



^ £ 

 « 



D 



Q 



E 

 o 



W 



U 



CO CM iO CO 



O) CM 00 CO 



CO O ^ •* 



co" co" cr>" r>T 



cm r~. o o o 



lO CO iO o lO 

 CO O ^ lo CO 



lo" ltT en" o" co" 



CM CO O LO 



— ' CO --• LO 



_ CO o o 

 CD ^ CO CO 

 CM O CO 



v « O, 



<S •£ S 



tf W 



- .X — 



W ^ u 



CC3 (J 



H 



3 T3 



w ° a 



3 a 



3 XI 



03 



5 3 £ 



*- 5 c 

 tx .2 •- 



"55 



- a^ • 



(3 J3. 



fi c 

 u .^. 



C T3 



a c 



03 



s. 



c 

 t3 



ah H 



W 5 



3 



.- 3 



x! cq 



T) _ ^3 



c « s 



<3 .y 3 



« 3 T3 



S J C 



3 o kj 



o u 




REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



373 



(^ cm co m in 



m m cm m -4" 



co co i—i m m 



S- Bj > U „ Ri ^ 



1 « «1 Is g?l 



O. O *- rt .3 H .3 u 



r* O V r - y, £ *£ "> 



% £> £ S3 g o.S « 



O 3 « -J *_, <U u rt 



Ot«0 a < J Ph cc 



J 





2. 



Smithsonian Foreign Currency Program Grants 



Awarded Fiscal Year 1966 



Archeology and Related Disciplines 



American Institute of Indian Studies, Philadelphia, Pa. To es- 

 tablish American Academy at Benares, India, an institution for 

 research in art history and archeology. 



American Research Center in Egypt, Boston, Mass. To support a 

 program of research and excavation in Egypt: a, Excavation of the 

 early Medieval Arab town of Fustat; b, Excavation of a fortified 

 town in Nubia (Gebel Adda); c, Epigraphic and architectural 

 survey at Luxor; d, Excavation of a stratified Pharonic site at Mendes 

 in the Nile Delta; e, Field project for recording and preserving the 

 treasures of St. Catherine's Monastery, Mt. Sinai; f, Study of ancient 

 glass found at Fustat; g, Operation of Center facilities at Cairo; 

 h, Survey of opportunities for restoration of monuments and sites; 

 i, Excavation of ancient city of Hierakonpolis. 



Brooklyn Museum. To support three projects: a, Construction of 

 scale models of Egyptian monuments, b, Study of ancient Egyptian 

 goldwork; c, Photographic survey of ancient sites. 



Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, University of California, 

 Berkeley. To test utilization of cosmic rays to "x-ray" the Egyptian 

 pyramids in search of presently unknown chambers. 



Carnegie Museum, Pittsburgh Theological Seminary. To exca- 

 vate a Philistine city at Ashdod, Israel. 



University of Colorado. To prepare a proposal to study prehistoric 

 archeological and paleontologic remains in Tunisia. 



Jerusalem School of Archeology of the Hebrew Union College, 

 Cincinnati, Ohio. To excavate an archeological site at Gezer, 

 Israel, and to conduct a Summer Institute on Near Eastern Civiliza- 

 tions. 



Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey. To study 

 and document Bronze and Iron age materials in Yugoslavia. 



375 




376 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — APPENDIX 



Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan. To develop 

 a program for research and training in prehistoric archeology in 

 Israel. 



Curators of the University of Missouri. To investigate ancient 

 Phoenician glass manufacturing sites in Israel. 



Institute of International Studies and Overseas Administration, 

 University of Oregon. To conduct research into the history of 

 ancient civilizations of Guinea. 



University Museum, University of Pennsylvania. To excavate the 

 archeological site at Mohenjo-daro in the lower Indus Valley, Pak- 

 istan. 



University Museum, University of Pennsylvania. To study remain- 

 ing stones of the Temple of Akhnaten at Luxor, Egypt. 



Smithsonian Institution, Office of Anthropology. To study 

 ancient urban technology in Pakistan and India. 



Southern Methodist University. To study prehistory of the area 

 around Sibaiya, Egypt. 



Southern Methodist University. To complete excavations near 

 Tushka, Egypt, of an archeological site to be inundated by water 

 rising behind the Aswan Dam. 



American Museum of Natural History, University of Washington, 

 Seattle. To study and excavate prehistoric and early historic 

 sites in East and West Pakistan. 



Peabody Museum of Natural History, Yale University. To ex- 

 cavate the Oligocene and Miocene deposits of Egypt to enlarge 

 knowledge of the primitive ancestors of man in Egypt. 




3. 



Publications of the Smithsonian Press 

 For the Tear Ended June 30, 1966 



SMITHSONIAN SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS 



NATURAL HISTORY 



Flora of Japan, by Jisaburo Ohwi. ix-j- 1067 pp., 33 pis., 18 figs. 

 Publ. 4542, September 20, 1965. ($25.) 



Gems in the Smithsonian Institution, by Paul E. Desautels. 74 pp., 

 46 pis., 18 figs. Publ. 4608, December 14, 1965. ($1.25.) 



The United States and the world ocean, by Lt. Comdr. Don Walsh, 

 USN. 28 pp., 13 pis. Publ. 4650, December 3, 1965. (25 cents.) 



The Philippine Bureau of Science Monographic Publications on Fishes: 

 No. 1, Check-list of the species of fishes known from the Philippine 

 Archipelago, by David Starr Jordan and Robert Earl Richardson, 

 78 pp. 1910. No. 23, Gobies of the Philippines and the China 

 Sea, by Albert W. Herre, 352 pp., 1-30 pis., 6 figs., 1927. No. 24, 

 Pomacentridae of the Philippine Islands by Heraclio R. Montalban, 

 117 pp., 19 pis., 1927. September 1, 1965. (tfh fund reprint: 

 $5.50.) 



SMITHSONIAN ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory star catalog. Four volumes, 



unpaged. Publ. 4652, March 18, 1966. ($20.) 

 Lighthouse of the skies — The Smithsonian Observatory: Background 



and history, 1846-1955, by Bessie Zaban Jones. 399 pp., 32 pis. 



Publ. 4612, September 16, 1965. ($5.) 



NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 



Roots of abstract art in America, 1910-1930; introd. by Adelyn D. 



Breeskin. 93 pp., illustr. Publ. 4655, 1965. ($3.65.) 

 Frederic Edwin Church; preface by Richard P. Wunder. 86 pp., 



illustr. Publ. 4657, 1966. ($3.95.) 

 American landscape: A changing frontier; introd. by David W. Scott. 



42 pp., illustr. Publ. 4671, 1966. ($2.25.) 



377 




378 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 APPENDIX 



SMITHSONIAN TRAVELING EXHIBITION SERVICE 



Early monuments and architecture of Ireland. 4 pp. Publ. 4642, 



1965. 

 Durer and his time. 252 pp., illustr. Publ. 4647, 1965. ($4.25.) 

 Rugs from the Joseph V. McMullan collection. 57 pp., illustr. Publ. 



4660, 1966. (SI. 50.) 

 Art treasures of Turkey, introductions by Rodney S. Young and 



Richard Ettinghausen. 217 pp., illustr. Publ. 4663, 1966. 



($3.65.) 

 Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service catalogue, 



1966-1967. 60 pp., illustr. Publ. 4668, 1966. 

 New names in Latin American art, introduction by Jose Gomez-Sicre. 



14 pp., illustr. Publ. 4672, 1966. (35 cents.) 



HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY 



Meissen and other German porcelain in the Alfred Duane Pell collec- 

 tion, by Paul Vickers Gardner. 68 pp., illustr. Publ. 4256, 1966. 



($2.) 

 American folk art from the Eleanor and Mabel Van Alstyne collection, 



by Peter C. Welsh. 97 pp., 65 pis. Publ. 4615, 1965. ($3.) 

 The trotter in America Prints from the Harry T. Peters America on 



stone lithography collection, Smithsonian Institution, by Peter C. 



Welsh. 17 pp., 14 pis. Publ. 4637, August 16, 1965. (50 cents.) 

 Exterior inscriptions — Museum of History and Technology. 3 pp. 



Publ. 4639, July 21, 1965. 

 The First Ladies hall, by Margaret W. Brown Klapthor. 14 pp., illustr. 



Publ. 4640, September 6, 1965. (50 cents.) 

 The Dolls' house, by Faith Bradford. 29 pp., illustr. Publ. 4641, 



September 28, 1965. (50 cents.) 

 The great design — two lectures on the Smithson bequest by John 



Quincy Adams, edited, with an introduction, by Wilcomb E. 



Washburn. 95 pp., 8 pis. Publ. 4643, September 16, 1965. ($5.) 



AMERICAN HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION 



Annual report of the American Historical Association for the year 1959. 



Vol. II, Writings on American History, 1957. xv + 698 pp. 



July 12, 1965. 

 Annual report of the American Historical Association for the year 1 964. 



Vol. I, Proceedings, xxix + 83 pp. November 3, 1965. 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Brief guide to the museums in the Washington area. 39 pp., 31 pis. 



Publ. 4528, September 27, 1965. (25 cents.) 

 Smithsonian research opportunities — science, fine arts, history, 1966— 

 1967. 64 pp. Publ. 4645, September 21, 1965. (50 cents.) 




PUBLICATIONS OF SMITHSONIAN PRESS 379 



Smithsonian publications 1848-1965. 16 pp. Publ. 4646, September 

 16, 1965. 



SMITHSONIAN SERIES 



Smithsonian Annual Reports 

 Smithsonian year 1965. 439 pp., illustr. Publ. 4648, January 27, 



1966. 

 Annual report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution, 

 1964. xiii-f 553 pp. Publ. 4613, December 30, 1965. 

 The general appendix contained the following papers, which were 

 published separately (Publ. 4618-4636), as follows: 

 The quest for life beyond the earth, by Carl Sagan. 

 The secret of Stonehenge, by Gerald S. Hawkins. 



The Smithsonian's satellite-tracking program: its history and organiza- 

 tion. Part 3, by Nelson Hayes. 

 How mountains are formed, by R. A. Lyttleton. 

 The future of oceanography, by Athelstan Spilhaus. 

 Search for the Thresher, by F. N. Spiess and A. E. Maxwell. 

 Recent events in relativity, by Milton A. Rothman. 

 The edge of science, by Sanborn C. Brown. 

 Anatomy of an experiment: An account of the discovery of the neutrino, 



by Clyde L. Cowan. 

 Fracture of solids, by J. E. Field. 



Man-made diamonds: A progress report, by C. G. Suits. 

 How do microbes "fix" nitrogen from the air? by D. J. D. Nicholas. 

 The unity of ecology, by F. Fraser Darling. 

 Venomous animals and their toxins, by Findlay E. Russell. 

 How insects work in groups, by John Sudd. 

 Our native termites, by Thomas E. Snyder. 

 The phenomenon of predation, by Paul L. Errington. 

 5,000 years of stone age culture in Borneo, by Tom Harrisson. 

 The emergence of the Plains Indian as the symbol of the North American 

 Indian, by John C. Ewers. 



Smithsonian Contributions to Astrophysics 

 volume 8 

 9. Static diffusion models of the upper atmosphere with empirical 

 temperature profiles, by Luigi G. Jacchia. pp. 215-257, 4 figs., 

 2 tab. December 27, 1965. 



Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 

 volume 148 

 6. Middle and late Turonian oysters of the Lopha lugubris group, by 

 Erie G. Kauffman. 92 pp., 8 pis., 18 figs. Publ. 4602, October 6, 

 1965. 




380 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 APPENDIX 



7. An account of the Astropysical Observatory of the Smithsonian 



Institution, 1904-1953, by G. G. Abbot. 16 pp., 4 figs. Publ. 

 4656, February 24, 1966. 



8. Forecasting from harmonic periods in precipitation, by C. G. 



Abbot. 16 pp., 8 figs. Publ. 4659, March 23, 1966. 



9. New Lower Cambrian trilobite faunule from the taconic sequence 



of New York, by Franco Rasetti. 52 pp., 12 pis. Publ. 4662, 

 May 23, 1966. 



VOLUME 149 



4. An endocranial cast of the Bridger middle Eocene primate Smilo- 



dectes gracilis, by C. Lewis Gazin. 14 pp., 2 pis. Publ. 4616, July 1, 

 1965. 



5. Display patterns of tropical American "Nine-Primaried" songbirds. 



IV. The yellow-rumped tanager, by M. Moynihan. 34 pp., 6 

 figs. Publ. 4644, January 27, 1966. 



6. Echinoid distribution and habits, Key Largo coral reef preserve, 



Florida, by Porter M. Kier and Richard E. Grant. 68 pp., 16 pis., 

 15 figs. Publ. 4649, October 22, 1965. 



7. Silicified Ordovician brachiopods from east-central Alaska, by 



Reuben James Ross, Jr., and J. Thomas Dutro, Jr. 22 pp., 3 pis., 

 1 fig. Publ. 4654, March 4, 1966. 



8. Bartolome Bermejo's "Espiscopal Saint." A study in medieval 



Spanish symbolism, by Herbert Friedmann. 21 pp., 11 pis. Publ. 

 4658, April 4, 1966. 



9. A new Pliocene stork from Nebraska, by Lester L. Short, Jr. 1 1 pp., 



1 pi. Publ. 4661, May 26, 1966. 



VOLUME 150 



[Whole Volume.] The birds of the Republic of Panama. Part 1. — 

 Tinamidae (tinamous) to Rynchopidae (skimmers), by Alexander 

 Wetmore. 483 pp., 73 pis. Publ. 4617, December 27, 1965. ($6.) 



VOLUME 151 



1. Stringocephalus in the Devonian of Indiana, by G. Arthur Cooper and 

 Thomas Phelan. 20 pp., 5 pis., 2 figs. Publ. 4664, May 23, 1966. 



4. Parapercis kamoharai (family Mugiloididae), a new fish from Japan 

 with notes on other species of the genus, by Leonard P. Schultz. 

 4 pp., 1 pi. Publ. 4669, May 18, 1966. 



United States National Museum Bulletins 

 museum of natural history 



202, vol. 3. Fishes of the Marshall and Marianas Islands, by Leonard 

 P. Schultz and collaborators: Loren P. Woods and Ernest A. 

 Lachner. vii+176 pp., 25 pis., 18 tab., 22 figs. March 9, 1966. 




PUBLICATIONS OF SMITHSONIAN PRESS 381 



246. Catalog of living whales, by Philip Hershkovitz. 259 pp. Feb- 

 ruary 28, 1966. 



247, parts 1 and 2. Fossil marine mammals from the Miocene Calvert 

 formation of Maryland and Virginia, by Remington Kellogg. 63 

 pp., 32 pis., 31 figs. October 15, 1965. 



MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY 



229. Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology: 

 Papers 31-33, on numismatics. 



32. Numismatics: an ancient science — a survey of its history, by 

 Elvira Eliza Clain-Stefanelli. 102 pp., 47 figs. December 30, 

 1965. 



33. Italian coin engravers since 1800, by Elvira Eliza Clain- 

 Stefanelli. 68 pp., 138 figs., December 13, 1965. 



241. Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology: 



Papers 45-51, on cultural history. 



47. Presentation pieces in the Museum of History and Technology, 

 by Margaret Brown Klapthor. pp. 81-108, 22 figs. Sep- 

 tember 20, 1965. 



49. Benjamin Latrobe and Dolley Madison decorate the White 

 House, 1809-1811, by Margaret Brown Klapthor. pp. 153-164, 

 10 figs. November 3, 1965. 



51. Woodworking tools, 1600-1900, by Peter C. Welsh, pp. 177- 

 227, 66 figs. June 7, 1966. 



245. Cincinnati locomotive builders, 1845-1868, by John H. White. 

 167 pp., 56 figs. December 30, 1965. 



249. Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology: 

 Papers 52-58, on historic sites archeology. 



52. Excavations at Clay Bank in Gloucester County, Virginia, 

 1962-1963, by Ivor Noel Hume. pp. 1-28, 16 figs. January 

 18, 1966. 



53. Excavations at Tutter's Neck in James City County, Virginia, 

 1960-1961, by Ivor Noel Hume. pp. 29-72, 20 figs. June 3, 

 1966. 



250. Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology: 

 Papers 59- , on cultural history. 



61. Rembrandt's etching technique: An example, by Peter 

 Morse, pp. 93-108, 16 figs. May 4, 1966. 



Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletins 



194. Hidatsa social and ceremonial organization, by Alfred W. Bowers. 

 xii + 528 pp., 12 pis., 12 figs., 5 maps, 14 charts, 4 tab. 1965. 



230-457—66 31 




382 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 APPENDIX 



195. The Ponca tribe, by James H. Howard, xii-f- 191 pp., 24 pis., 

 8 figs., 1 map. 1965. 



196. Anthropological papers, nos. 75-80. iii-j-470 pp., 4 pis., 14 figs., 

 2 maps, 26 tab. 1966. 



Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology 



volume 1 



[Whole volume.] Early formative period of coastal Ecuador: The 

 Valdivia and Machalilla phases, by Betty J. Meggers, Clifford 

 Evans, and Emilio Estrada. xxi-|-234 pp., 196 pis., 115 figs., 

 30 tables. December 20, 1965. 



Contributions from the National Herbarium 



volume 32 



Part 5. The American species of Ormosia (Leguminosae), by Velva E. 

 Rudd. pp. 279-384, 6 pis., 15 figs. September 17, 1965. 



VOLUME 37 



Part 2. Mosses of the Eastern Highlands, New Guinea, from the 6th 

 Archbold Expedition, 1959, by Edwin B. Bartram. pp. 1-66. 

 September 21, 1965. 



Proceedings of the United States National Museum 



VOLUME 1 1 6 



Title page, table of contents and index, pp. v + 557-586. January 

 13, 1966. 



VOLUME 1 1 7 



3508. Microlepidoptera of Juan Fernandez Island, by J. F. Gates 

 Clarke, pp. 1-106, 1 pi, 111 figs. July 13, 1965. 



3509. Neotropical Hemerobiidae in the United States National 

 Museum, by Waro Nakahara. pp. 107-122, 2 pis., 5 figs. July 30, 

 1965. 



3510. Hermatobates, a new generic record for the Atlantic Ocean, 

 with descriptions of new species (Hemiptera: Gerridae), by Jon L. 

 Herring, pp. 123-130, 4 figs. July 6, 1965. 



3511. Benthic polychaetous annelids from Bering, Chukchi, and 

 Beaufort Seas, by Donald J. Reish. pp. 131-158, 1 tab, 3 figs. 

 August 25, 1965. 




PUBLICATIONS OF SMITHSONIAN PRESS 383 



3512. Haustoriidae of New England (Crustacea: Amphipoda), by 

 E. L. Bousfield. pp. 159-240, 31 figs. August 17, 1965. 



3513. Planktonic copepods from Bahia Fosforescente, Puerto Rico, 

 and adjacent waters, by Juan C. Gonzalez and Thomas E. Bowman, 

 pp. 241-304, 21 figs. August 24, 1965. 



3514. Revision of the milliped genera Boraria and Gyalostethus 

 (Polydesmida: Xstodesmidae), by Richard L. Hoffman, pp. 305- 

 348, 26 figs. August 17, 1965. 



3515. Revision of Diaperini of America north of Mexico with notes 

 on extralimital species (Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae), by Charles A. 

 Triplehorn. pp. 349-458, 7 pis., 3 figs. November 16, 1965. 



3516. Marine Amphipoda of Atolls in Micronesia, by J. Laurens 

 Barnard, pp. 459-552, 11 tab., 35 figs. December 14, 1965. 



3517. Hedgehogs and shrews of Turkey, by Dale J. Osborn. pp. 553- 

 566, 4 figs. December 3, 1965. 



3518. Systematic significance of breeding tubercles in fishes of the 

 family Percidae, by Bruce B. Collette. pp. 567-614, 3 tab., 7 figs. 

 December 7, 1965. 



3519. Land snails of the genus Amphidromus from Thailand (Mollusca: 

 Pulmonata: Camaenidae), by Alan Solem. pp. 615-629, 2 pis. 

 December 3, 1965. 



3520. A review of the genus Haimbrachia Dyar with descriptions of 

 new species (Lepidoptera: Crambidae), by Hahn W. Capps. 

 pp. 629-653, 6 figs. December 13, 1965. 



3521. Genus Lexiphanes of America north of Mexico (Coleoptera: 

 Chrysomelidae), by Edward U. Balsbaugh, Jr. pp. 655-680, 8 figs. 

 January 18, 1966. 



VOLUME 118 



3522. Marine Amphipoda of the family Ampithoidae from southern 

 California, by J. Laurens Barnard, pp. 1-46, 28 figs. December 

 30, 1965. 



3523. Species of Oedemeridae of the Big Bend region of Texas, by 

 Ross H. Arnett, Jr. pp. 47-55, 6 pis., 3 figs. December 17, 1965. 



3524. Copepod crustaceans parasitic on elasmobranch fishes of the 

 Hawaiian Islands, by Alan G. Lewis, pp. 57-154, 40 figs. April 

 12, 1966. 



3525. Revision of the Pilargidae (Annelida: Polychaeta), including 

 descriptions of new species, and redescription of the pelagic 

 Podarmus ploa Chamberlin (Polynoidae), by Marian H. Pettibone. 

 pp. 155-208, 26 figs. March 31, 1966. 



3526. Descriptions and records of West Indian Cerambycidae (Cole- 

 optera), by John A. Chemsak. pp. 209-220. February 8, 1966. 




384 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — APPENDIX 



3527. Neotropical Microlepidoptera VII, new genus Pseudomeritastis 

 and its species (Lepidoptera: Tortricidae), by Nicholas S. 

 Obraztsov. pp. 221-232, 6 pis., 2 figs. February 23, 1966. 



3528. More new galerucine bettles with excised middle tibiae in 

 the male, by Doris H. Blake, pp. 233-266, 35 figs. February 

 23, 1966. 



3529. A review of the beetles of the genus Neobrotica and some closely 

 related genera, by Doris H. Blake, pp. 267-372, 16 figs. April 

 14, 1966. 



3530. Notes on certain nearctic Trichoptera in the Museum of Com- 

 parative Zoology, by Oliver S. Flint, Jr. pp. 373-390, 4 figs. 

 February 23, 1966. 



3531. Neotropical Microlepidoptera VIII, a review of the genus 

 Falculina with descriptions of new species (Lepidoptera: Steno- 

 midae), by W. Donald Duckworth, pp. 391-404, 1 pi., 5 figs. 

 February 10, 1966. 



3532. A revision of the genus Furnaricola (Mallophaga) with descrip- 

 tions of new species, by M. A. Carriker, Jr. pp. 405-432, 31 figs. 

 March 9, 1966. 




4. 



Members of the Smithsonian Council 

 June 30, 1966 



Ralph E. Alston. Professor of Botany, University of Texas, Austin, 

 Texas. Born 1925. B.S. College of William and Mary, Ph. D. 

 University of Indiana, 1955. Author of Biochemical Systematics 

 (1963). Research interests include plant physiology and genetics. 



H. Harvard Arnason. Vice President for Art Administration of the 

 Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, 1071 Fifth Avenue, New 

 York City. Born 1909. B.S. and A.M. Northwestern University, 

 M.F.A. Princeton University, 1939. Worked with O.W.I. 

 1942-1945 and the State Department, Office of International 

 Information and Cultural Affairs, 1945-1946; from 1947-1961 

 served as professor and chairman of the Department of Art at 

 the University of Minnesota; appointed to present position in 

 1961. Member of the Art in America editorial board as well as 

 many professional organizations. Author of numerous articles 

 on medieval and modern art, Modern Sculpture (1962), and 

 Conrad Marca-Relli (1962). 



Whitfield J. Bell, Jr. Association Librarian, American Philo- 

 sophical Society, 105 South Fifth Street, Philadelphia, Penn- 

 sylvania. Born 1914. A.B. Dickinson College, Ph. D. University 

 of Pennsylvania, 1947. Associated with Dickinson College 

 1937-1954; assistant and then associate editor of the Papers 

 of Benjamin Franklin 1954-1961; and from 1961 Association 

 Librarian of APS. Editor of Bibliography of the History of Medicine 

 in the U.S. and Canada (1948-1953) and Mr. Franklin (with L. W. 

 Labaree) (1956). Author of Needs and Opportunities for Research 

 in the History of Early American Science ( 1 955) . 



Fred R. Egg an. Professor of Anthropology, University of Chicago, 

 1126 East 59th Street, Chicago, Illinois. Born 1906. Ph. B. 

 University of Chicago, Ph. D. University of Chicago, 1933. 

 Has been with the University of Chicago since 1 934 (Chairman 



385 




386 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 APPENDIX 



of the Department of Anthropology since 1961 and Director 

 of the Philippine Studies Program since 1953). Has served 

 as the U.S. official delegate to the Pacific Science Congresses 

 in Manila (1953), Bangkok (1957), and Honolulu (1961). 

 Research centers on the Indians of western United States and 

 the tribes of the Philippines. Author of Social Organization of 

 the Western Pueblos (1959). Editor of Social Anthropology of North 

 American Tribes (1937 and 1955). 

 Donald S. Farner. Chairman, Department of Zoology, University 

 of Washington, Seattle, Washington. Born 1915. B.A. Hamline 

 University, Ph. D. University of Wisconsin, 1941. With the 

 Washington State University 1947-1966 (Dean of the Graduate 

 School 1960-1966). Author of The Birds of Crater Lake National 

 Park (1952) and contributor to many scientific publications, 

 mainly on the subject of ornithology. 

 Anthony N. B. Garvan. Chairman, Department of American 

 Civilization, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsyl- 

 vania. Born 1917. B.A. and M.A. Yale University, Ph. D. 

 Yale University, 1948. Has been with the University of Pennsyl- 

 vania since 1951, except three years (1957-1960) as Head Curator 

 of the Department of Civil History at the Smithsonian Institution 

 (Chairman of the Department of American Civilization since 

 1960). Editor of the American Quarterly 1951-1957. Author of 

 Architecture and Town Planning in Colonial Connecticut (1951), Index 

 of American Cultures (1953). 

 G. Evelyn Hutchinson. Sterling Professor of Zoology, Yale University, 

 New Haven, Connecticut. Born 1903. University of Cam- 

 bridge. Has been at Yale since 1928. Author of The Clear 

 Mirror (1936), The Itinerant Ivory Tower (1953), A Treatise on 

 Limnology, vol. 1 (1957), A Preliminary List of the Writings of Rebecca 

 West 1912-1951 (1957), The Enchanted Voyage (1962), The Ecological 

 Theater and the Evolutionary Play (1965), and many scientific papers. 

 Studies lie in the fields of oceanography and limnology, ecology, 

 population biology, and biology in the development of literature 

 and the fine arts. 

 Clifford L. Lord. President, Hofstra University, Hempstead, Long- 

 Island, New York. Born 1912. A.B. and A.M. Amherst College, 

 Ph. D. Columbia University, 1943. Was Director of the New 

 York State Historical Association 1941-1946; organized the 

 Farmers' Museum in Cooperstown, New York, in 1942; Honorary 

 Director of Circus World Museum (Director 1955-58); Vice 

 President of the National Railroad Museum 1956 — ; Dean of the 




MEMBERS OF SMITHSONIAN COUNCIL 387 



School of General Studies and Professor of History at Columbia 

 University 1958-1965. Member of many historical associations. 

 Author of History of U.S. Naval Aviation (1949). 



Charles D. Michener. Watkins Distinguished Professor of Entomol- 

 ogy, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. Born 1918. 

 B.S. University of California at Berkeley, Ph. D. University of 

 California at Berkeley, 1941. Has been with the University of 

 Kansas since 1948 (Watkins Distinguished Professor since 1959). 

 Served as State Entomologist 1949-1961. Author of American 

 Social Insects (with Mary H. Michener) (1951), Nest Architecture 

 of the Sweat Bees (with S. F. Sakagami) (1962), and approximately 

 200 technical works, mainly on bees. Work in taxonomy reflects 

 his interests in concepts of numerical taxonomy, behavior, and 

 ecology. 



Peter M. Millman. National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa 

 2, Ontario, Canada. Born 1906. B.A. Toronto, Ph. D. Harvard 

 University, 1932. President of the Royal Astronomical Council 

 of Canada. A meteoritic specialist whose studies include those 

 of the upper atmosphere with planetary and space research; also 

 interested in the culture of Japan and international exchanges. 



Robert Motherwell. 173 East 94th Street, New York City. Born 

 1915. A. B. Stanford University, 1937. A well-known artist who 

 has exhibited nationally and internationally and contributes to 

 American and foreign magazines. Editor of The Documents of 

 Modern Art 1944-1952. 



Norman D. Newell. Chairman, Department of Fossil Invertebrates, 

 American Museum of Natural History, New York City. Born 

 1909. B.S. and A.M. University of Kansas, Ph. D. Yale Uni- 

 versity, 1933. Since 1945 has been a professor at Columbia 

 University as well as curator of invertebrate paleontology at the 

 American Museum of Natural History. Author of The Nature of 

 the Fossil Record (1959), Organism Communities and Bottom Fades, 

 Great Bahama Bank (1959) and is the organizer of the pelecypod 

 volume of the Treatise on Paleontology. Coeditor of the Journal of 

 Paleontology (1939-1942). Has visited all parts of North America, 

 Europe, Australia, and Asia in the study of the Permian of the 

 world. Other major field of interest is pelecypods. 



Norman Holmes Pearson. Chairman of the Department of American 

 Studies, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. Born 1909. 

 A.B. Yale University, Ph. D. Yale University, 1941. Has been 

 with Yale University since 1941 and in his present position since 

 1958. Editor of Complete Novels of Hawthorne (1937), The Oxford 




388 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 APPENDIX 



Anthology of American Literature (with W. R. Benet) (1938), 

 Walden (1948), Poets of the English Language (with W. H. Auden) 

 (1950), and The Pathfinder (1952). 



Frederick Seitz. President, National Academy of Sciences, 2101 

 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. Born 1911. 

 A.B. Leland Stanford Jr. University, Ph. D. Princeton, 1934. 

 Has taught physics at University of Rochester, University of 

 Pennsylvania, Carnegie Institute of Technology, and University 

 of Illinois (Head of Department of Physics 1957 — Dean of 

 Graduate College and Vice President for Research 1964—1965). 

 Was Chairman of Governing Board of the American Institute of 

 Physics 1954-1959. President, NAS since 1962. Author of 

 Modern Theory of Solids (1940), The Physics of Metals (1943). 



Cyril Stanley Smith. Institute Professor, Massachusetts Institute of 

 Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Born 1903. B.S. Uni- 

 versity of Birmingham, Sc. D. Massachusetts Institute of Tech- 

 nology, 1926. Has been with M.I.T. since 1945 (Institute 

 Professor since 1961). Was a member of the President's Science 

 Advisory Committee in 1959. Coauthor of Structure and Proper- 

 ties of Solid Surfaces (1953), Reaumur'' s Memoirs on Steel and Iron 

 (1956), Treatise on Divers Arts by Theophilus (1963). Author of 

 A History of Metallography (1960). A primary interest is the 

 historical interaction between science and technology, and he is 

 a frequent consultant to the Freer Gallery of Art and the Smith- 

 sonian Office of Anthropology. 



John D. Spikes. College of Letters and Science, University of Utah, 

 Salt Lake City, Utah. Born 1918. B.S. California Institute of 

 Technology, Ph. D. California Institute of Technology, 1948. 

 Has been with the University of Utah since 1948 (except for a 

 period on leave as Cell Physiologist of the Division of Biology 

 and Medicine of the Atomic Energy Commission). Author of 

 numerous publications in scientific journals, bulletins, etc. 

 Major research is in biophysics, especially photobiology. 



Stephen E. Toulmin. Department of the History and Philosophy of 

 Science, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts. Born 

 1922. B.A. King's College, Ph. D. King's College, 1948. Has 

 taught at Oxford, University of Melbourne, University of Leeds, 

 New York University, Stanford University, and Columbia 

 University, and from 1960-1966 was Director of the Nuffield 

 Foundation Unit for History of Ideas. Author of The Place of 

 Reason in Ethics (1950); The Philosophy of Science, an Introduction 




MEMBERS OF SMITHSONIAN COUNCIL 389 



(1953); Metaphysical Beliefs (author of one of three essays) (1957); 

 The Uses of Argument (1958); Foresight and Understanding (1961); 

 "The Ancestry of Science": vol. 1 {The Fabric of Heavens) (1961), 

 vol. 2 {The Architecture of Matter) (1962), vol. 3 {The Discovery of 

 Time) (1965); Night Sky at Rhodes (1963). 





5. 



Appointments 1965-1966 

 Research Participation Programs 



Post- Doctoral, Graduate, Undergraduate 



POST-DOCTORAL RESEARCH ASSOCIATES 



Ralph F. Baierlein, Harvard University: General relativistic analysis of 



rotating astrophysical systems. 

 John H. Beaman, Michigan State University: Study of the alpine flora of 



Mexico and Guatemala. 

 James H. Brewer, North Carolina College (Durham) : The Confederate Negro: 



the ambivalent rebel in Virginia. 

 William A. Gosline, University of Hawaii: Classification and relationships of 



perciform fishes. 

 Charles W. Harper, Jr., University College of Swansea (G.B.): Investigation 



of Upper Ordovician, Silurian, and Devonian brachiopod collections in 



USNM. 

 Henry J. Kauffman, Millersville State College (Pennsylvania): Development 



of technology in America. 

 Peter B. Leavens, Harvard University: Mineralogy and geochemistry of the 



Fe-Mn phosphates and the paragenesis of secondary phosphates in 



pegmatites. 

 Frank J. S. Maturo, University of Florida: Systematic study of the Ectoprocta 



collected by the Atlantic Continental Shelf and Slope Survey (Hudson 



Canyon to Key West). 

 Robert H. McCorkell, University of Manitoba: Study of extraterrestrial 



materials in sea sediments by means of cosmic ray produced radio- 

 isotopes. 

 Thornton L. Page, Wesleyan University: Evolution of galaxies. 

 Francesco Parenti, Universita degli studi di Milano: Effect of previous 



photoperiodic treatment of leaves on biosynthetic capacity of isolated 



chloroplasts. 

 Ladislav Sehnal, Astronomical Institute, Ondrejov, Czechoslovakia: Solar 



radiation pressure effects in the motion of satellites. 



391 




392 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — APPENDIX 



GRADUATE RESEARCH PARTICIPATION PROGRAMS 



(*Denotes Pre-Doctoral Internship) 



Susan E. Bratley, University of Michigan: Basic reorganization of the 

 National Collection of Fine Arts/National Portrait Gallery Library 

 morgue (separating subject material from artist and institution files, 

 and setting up an American portrait file). 



Joseph C. Britton, Jr., Texas Christian University: Sorting, cataloguing, 

 and identifying a portion of material collected in conjunction with the 

 Indian Ocean Expedition in 1963. Collection contains some 2,400 lots 

 of mollusks representing 9143 specimens. 



* Everett D. Cashatt, Catholic University of America: Continuation and 

 expansion of project on consolidation and rearrangement, according to 

 latest revisionary study, of USNM collection of N. A. Chrysauginae. 

 Also, distribution and taxonomy of Oidaemathophorus balanotes 

 Meyrick were examined, resulting in description of two new species. 



Anthony G. Coates, University of the West Indies: Conducted studies on 

 Mesozoic Caribbean fossil collection, especially the coral fauna. 



George T. Farmer, Jr., University of Cincinnati: Continuation of studies 

 begun in 1961, completing preparation of specimens and studying 

 techniques to be used in the systematic part of the study, which will follow. 



Robert D. Gordon, North Dakota State University: Revision of the niger- 

 tenebrosus group of the genus Hydroporus (Coleoptera: Dytiscidae), 

 involving putting into practice the standard procedures of systematists 

 in the study of insect classification. 



*Elizabeth M. Harris, University of Reading (G. B.) : Study, classification, 

 and cataloguing of the Division of Graphic Arts' collection of prints. 



Sister Mary Victoria Hayden, St. Louis University: Survey of families of 

 seed plants represented on Barro Colorado Island, evaluation of her- 

 barium there and the system of filing used, study of the Rubiaceae, 

 microscope examination of seed coats of Psychotrieae, assistance in 

 observation of bees which frequent orchids. 



Henry L. Hull, Georgetown University: Study of the objects in the collec- 

 tion of Captain P. V. H. Weems U.S.N, (retired), and an attempt to 

 gain information on the historical background of the collection's instru- 

 ments on navigation in general. 



*Charles J. LaRue, Jr., University of Maryland: Variation and functional 

 interrelations of the major components of the bird skull. 



Robert F. Magnus, Columbia University Teachers College: Assisted in 

 installing and removing various exhibits; assisted in aspects of paper 

 work involved in exhibitions; designed signs used in several exhibitions; 

 made up model of art hall to be used for useful visualization of future 

 exhibits. 



Walker B. Moore, Jr., Howard University: Study of Eskimo and Aleut 

 juvenile skulls, involving suture closure and tooth eruption, and tabula- 

 tion of data on IBM processing cards. 




RESEARCH PARTICIPATION PROGRAMS 393 



*Eugene S. Morton, Cornell University: Ecology of avian sound; the forces 

 of the physical and biological environments selecting for or against 

 certain sound characteristics. 



*Martin G. Naumann, University of Kansas: Investigation and observation 

 of wasps in the field; making descriptions of nests and analyses of nest 

 populations. 



Dolores Newton, Harvard University: Assisted in research on the material 

 culture of the Seminole Indians of Florida; tabulated and organized 

 pictorial and photographic information to be used, and explored pos- 

 sibilities in categorizing design strips. 



Osborn B. Nye, Jr., University of Cincinnati: Learned techniques involved 

 in thin sectioning cyclostome bryozoans, and defining specific problems 

 for future work. 



Herbert H. Odom, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 



F. Paul Prucha, S.J., Marquette University: Study of the origin, development 

 and use of the Indian Peace Medal in the United States. 



* John R. Oppenheimer, University of Illinois: Ethology of Cabus capucinus. 

 *Carmen Perilliat, University of Mexico: Study of USNM's collection of 



Miocene mollusks. 



Patricia E. Putnam, Emory University: Identifying fern collections from 

 India, Mexico, Honduras, Michigan and Dominica; general herbarium 

 work, including refiling and demounting of returned specimens, labelling 

 and rearranging collections to conform with orders of genera in the fern 

 herbarium. 



*Gary L. Ranck, University of Utah: Study of the rodents of Libya. 



*Michael H. Robinson, University College of Swansea: Research and field 

 studies on insect antipredator behavior. 



Lawrence E. Schaad, University of Illinois: Description of avian and mam- 

 malian quarantine procedures at the National Zoological Park to explain 

 procedures of keeping accurate records on medical condition of accessions 

 of these species from all over the world; feeding routines, exams for 

 parasitic infestation, medication for control of observed parasites, and 

 preparation for conditions other than those caused by parasites. 



Kenneth W. Shipps, Yale University: Inquiry into the development and 

 prevalence of political campaign music in the U.S. from earliest traces in 

 Jefferson's campaign through 1860. 



Harold K. Skramstad, Jr., George Washington University: Devising system 

 for organizing, describing, and storing the archival and manuscript 

 collections of the Division of Mechanical and Civil Engineering; preparing 

 illustrated booklet on the archival collections; working out a system of 

 archival control, which might be adaptable to future acquistions. 



* Nicholas D. Smythe, University of Maryland: Reconnaissance of habitat 



and population density in order to establish basic data on ecology of the 

 Agouta. 

 Betty I. Strauss, University of Delaware: Iconography of George Washington. 



* William L. Taylor, Brown University: Traced growth and development of 



the port of Baltimore; analyzed evolution of the size and types of ships 




394 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — APPENDIX 



employed in trade and commerce; began dissertation on the gradual 

 domination during latter half of 19th and early 20th centuries of coastwise 

 steamship lines along the New England coast by the railroads of New 

 England. 

 Jane C. Wheeler, Cambridge University: Prehistoric hunting patterns in the 

 Iranian paleolithic sites. 



UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH PARTICIPATION PROGRAM 



Diane H. Alexander, University of Maryland: Identification by fiber content 

 and basic weave of a large collection of fabrics collected by U.S. con- 

 sulates from various countries during the late 19th and early 20th 

 centuries, for the organization of a fabric sample file by country. 



Ronald A. Anderson, Ferris State College: Fitting additional families into the 

 zocae key as a supplement to D. I. Williams (1957) key, which covered 

 approximately 13 families including all major sections of Decapoda. 



Oran W. Atkinson, Howard University: Bibliographical research, measure- 

 ment, and study of skeletal elements associated with hind limbs in 

 different genera, specimen sorting, and classifying specimens for pur- 

 poses of recording information on punch card files. 



Colles A. Baxter, Wheaton College: Verifying information and making out 

 reference cards, carrying out preliminary research on various collections 

 or paintings and labeling photographs and furniture. 



Denton F. Blair, Yale University: Assembling, preparing, and organizing 

 various collections and paintings for storage or exhibit, with particular 

 attention given to the Gellatly Collection. 



Daniel C. Church, Yale University: Study of the manifestations of the 

 American romantic movement in objects of material culture in connec- 

 tion with the Gothic and Italianate revivals. 



The A B. Comins, Bennington College: Helping to prepare catalogue for 

 Turkish exhibition; cataloguing new acquisitions; augmenting previous 

 catalogue entries. 



William D. Crosby, Jr., Yale University: Collecting parts of the story of the 

 history of rocketry through the year 1945 and compiling an outline and 

 analysis on the historical events. Assisted in taking inventory of the 

 Silver Hill warehouse facilities, including the identification and catalogu- 

 ing of pieces in this collection. 



Barbara B. Davenport, Bennington College: Preparing specimens for exhibit; 

 research pertaining to ceramic imports into the U.S., 1800-1825; 

 mounting slides. 



Arthur B. Davis, North Carolina State University: Work in the quantitative 

 analysis laboratory involving standard quantitative preparations and 

 procedures; running emission spectograph for qualitative analyses and 

 spectrophotometer for quantitative analyses: maintenance of meteorite 

 reference-filing system. 



Carolyn R. Fawcett, Radcliffe College: Transcribing and translating from the 

 notebook of Lorenzo della Volpaia, a contemporary of Cellini, da 




RESEARCH PARTICIPATION PROGRAMS 395 



Vinci, and Poliziano, with particular attention to the planetary clock 

 and scientific instruments designed and executed by della Volpaia. 



Jack B. Fisher, Cornell University: Field assistant in the Bredin-Archbold- 

 Smithsonian Biological Survey of Dominica; in the Botany Herbarium, 

 identified pressed material collected on Dominica last year and made 

 keys to genera and species for those families identified. 



Madeline E. Gerken, Cornell University: Work on the extraction of phyto- 

 chrome from green plants. 



Daniel D. Gibson, University of Alaska: In cooperation with the Oceano- 

 graphic Sorting Center and the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, con- 

 ducted study of seabird habits based on material on hand in the Division 

 of Birds from four Atlantic cruises, including one made by the participant. 



Jerold L. Grashoff, Michigan State University: Comparative anatomical 

 study of olyroid grasses. 



Robert K. Hitch, University of Tennessee: Typing Antarctic plankton down 

 to genus and making up a reference sample for the Lamont Geological 

 Laboratory. 



Judith A. Holland, Pennsylvania State University: Work on the classification 

 of the family Scarabaeidae of North America. 



Richard S. Hopkins, Harvard College: Work on reclassification of the mineral 

 study collection according to the seventh edition of Dana's "System of 

 Mineralogy" and addition to the existing files of new x-ray standards 

 of absolute accuracy, in large part for those same minerals that were being 

 reclassified. 



Dee Anne F. Houston, George Washington University: Analysis of living 

 reef-associated Bivalvia and their reflection in fossil reef assemblages. 



Marilyn R. Johnstone, Bard College: An evaluation of the journals of Charles 

 D. Walcott, 1870-1921. 



Joyce A. Keener, Bennington College: Helping to organize two print collec- 

 tions; outlining a procedure for identifying engravings and other graphic 

 works according to media. 



Richard H. Kessin, Yale University: Work on the isolation of RNA poly- 

 phosphates. 



Saul J. Krotki, University of Utah: Engaged in x-ray crystallographic analysis 

 of garnet. 



Mary F. Kundahl, George Washington University: Research on the Hans 

 Zyz Collection of 18th century Oriental and European porcelain; 

 involved revision of the Collection Catalogue, expansion of the catalogue 

 files, and assistance in processes necessary for displaying the collection. 



Richard S. Laub, Queens College, University of the City of New York: 

 Study of morphological variations found in horizontal and vertical 

 trending populations of the fossil coral Turbinolia pharetra. 



Barbara M. K. Lawrence, Bennington College: Compiled photofile books for 

 exhibitions; checked photographs in former Bureau of Ethnology files 

 against their negatives to determine if negatives could still be printed or 

 were still extant, or properly catalogued. 




396 SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — APPENDIX 



Jeffrey A. Levy, Bard College: Morphometric study of copepoda ectoparasitic 

 on sharks. 



James A. McKenney, University of Maryland: Participated in initiation of 

 proposed Smithsonian catalogue of the Neotropical Squamata, confining 

 work to literature available on lizards known to occur south of Mexico. 



Russell B. Merrill, University of Kansas: Assisting in the illustration, descrip- 

 tion, and population analysis of part of the ostracode fauna of the 

 western Indian Ocean. 



Susan E. Mintz, Bennington College: Learning techniques of conservation and 

 preservation of ethnological and archeological specimens. 



Maria C. Novoa, Mount Marty College (South Dakota): Studying evolu- 

 tionary trends of asteroids. 



Martha S. Ray, University of Connecticut: Research on distinguishing 

 between mysids and euphausids. 



Charlotte Rundles, Duke University: Engaged in anatomical research on 

 the freshwater mollusks of Thailand, some of which are of medical im- 

 portance. Reassigned: Study of the cranial and facial measurements of 

 Eskimo and Aleutian children. 



Stephen L. Schilling, College of William and Mary: Compiling an annotated 

 bibliography on animal-sediment relationships, writing a report on 

 benthic animals found in marine sediments, and assisting in setting up 

 the Division of Sedimentology. 



Elizabeth E. Scull, Bennington College: Survey of National Collection of 

 Fine Arts' American art paintings suitable for exhibit; initiating survey of 

 American art course offerings in U.S. 



Christiane E. Seidenschnur, Michigan State University: Study and prepara- 

 tion of a large collection of Virginia-Maryland plants for deposit in the 

 National Herbarium and distribution as exchange. 



Priscilla A. Sherwin, Pomona College: Vascularization of aroid flowers, 

 of which the Department has a large collection, preserved following 

 collecting trips. 



Dorman H. Smith, University of California: Carrying out preliminary research 

 on instruments in the collection, then cataloguing and storing them; 

 research and presentation of a paper to the Division staff on enharmonic 

 keyboard instruments. 



Shari B. Taylor, Wheaton College (Massachusetts): Studying the Jurassic 

 Formaninifera of the western interior of the United States. Reas- 

 signed: Study of the size of Wilson's petrel related to its geographic distri- 

 bution. 




6. 



Staff of the Smithsonian Institution 



June 30, 1966 



Office of the Secretary 



Office of the Assistant Secre- 

 tary (Administration) 



Office of the Assistant Secre- 

 tary (Science) 



Fine Arts Special Project 

 Office of Education and 



Training 

 Office of International 



Activities 

 General Counsel 

 Public Information 

 Smithsonian Press 

 Smithsonian Libraries 



Smithsonian Museum Service 

 Smithsonian Associates 



Fiscal 



Organization and Methods 

 Programming and Budget 

 Contracts 

 Internal Audit 

 Information Systems 



Theodore W. Taylor, Assistant to the Secre- 

 tary 



Philip G. Ritterbush, Special Assistant to the 

 Secretary 



Robert W. Mason, Executive Assistant 



Robert N. Cunningham, Development Officer 



Samuel T. Suratt, Archivist 



John Whitelaw, Executive Assistant 



Otis O. Martin, Financial Management 

 Adviser 



Harry Hyman, Special Assistant for Science 

 Resources Planning 



Michael A. Stahl, Administrative Officer 



Thomas M. Beggs 



Charles Blitzer, Director 



William W. Warner, Director 



Peter G. Powers 



B. Richard Berg, Director 



Anders Richter, Director 



Mrs. Mary A. Huffer, Acting Director 



Ruth E. Blanchard, Library of Congress 

 Liaison 



Meredith Johnson, Acting Director 



G. Carroll Lindsay, Acting Executive Secre- 

 tary 



Mrs. Lisa M. Suter, Program Manager 



Mrs. Betty J. Morgan, Assistant Treasurer 



Ernest A. Berger, Assistant Treasurer 



Mrs. Ann S. Campbell, Director 



Edward H. Kohn, Director 



Eld ridge O. Hurlbut, Contracting Officer 



Douglas R. Martin 



Nicholas J. Suszynski, Director 



397 



230-457 — 66- 



-32 




398 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — APPENDIX 



Personnel 



Buildings Management 

 Supply 

 Photographic Services 



J. A. Kennedy, Director 

 Andrew F. Michaels, Jr., Director 

 Fred G. Barwick, Chief 

 O. H. Greeson, Chief 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Director 



Registrar 



Office of Exhibits 



Natural History Laboratory 



History and Technology 



Laboratory 

 Exhibits Labels Editor 

 Conservation Research Labora- 

 tory 

 Traveling Exhibition Service 



Exhibits Coordinators 



Frank A. Taylor 



Helena M. Weiss 



John E. Anglim, Chief 



A. Gilbert Wright, Assistant Chief 



Julius Tretick, Production Supervisor 



Benjamin W. Lawless, Chief 



William M. Clark, Jr., Production Supervisor 



George Weiner 



Charles H. Olin, Chief 



Mrs. Jacqueline S. Olin, Chemist 



Mrs. Dorothy Van Arsdale, Chief 



Mrs. Nancy Curtis Padnos, Assistant Chief 



Frances P. Smyth, Mrs. Erika Passantino, 



Barboura C. Flues, Mrs. Jean Taylor, 



Mrs. Genie Rice 



MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 



Director 



Deputy Director 



Assistant Director for Oceanog- 

 raphy and Limnology 

 Smithsonian Oceanographic 

 Sorting Center 



Assistant Director for Ecology 

 Research Biologist 



Special Assistant for Tropical 

 Biology 



Director, Chesapeake Bay 

 Field Station 



Administrative Officer 



Smithsonian Office of 

 Anthropology 



Cultural Anthropology 



Richard S. Cowan 

 Donald F. Squires 

 I. Eugene Wallen 



H. Adair Fehlmann 



Helmut K. Buechner 



Lee M. Talbot 



F. Raymond Fosberg 



Kyle R. Barbehenn 



Mrs. Mabel A. Byrd 

 Richard B. Woodbury, Chairman 

 T. Dale Stewart, Senior Scientist 

 Waldo R. Wedel, Senior Scientist 

 John C. Ewers, Senior Scientist 

 Henry B. Collins, Senior Scientist 

 Mrs. M. Blaker, Archivist 

 Joseph Andrews, Exhibit Specialist 

 Saul H. Riesenberg, Curator in Charge 

 Gordon D. Gibson, Associate Curator 




STAFF 



399 



Physical Anthropology 



River Basin Surveys 

 Vertebrate ^oology 



Fishes 



Reptiles and Amphibians 

 Birds 



Mammals 

 Invertebrate ^oology 



Crustacea 



Echinoderms 

 Worms 



Mollusks 



Entomology 



Neuropteroids 



Eugene I. Knez, Associate Curator 

 Clifford Evans, Jr., Curator 

 William H. Crocker, Associate Curator 

 Gus W. Van Beek, Associate Curator 

 Kent V. Flannery, Associate Curator 

 William C. Sturtevant, Associate Curator 

 Robert M. Laughlin, Associate Curator 

 J. Lawrence Angel, Curator in Charge 

 Lucile E. Hoyme, Associate Curator 

 Robert L. Stephenson, Anthropologist 

 Philip S. Humphrey, Chairman 

 Leonard P. Schultz, Senior Scientist 

 Ernest A. Lachner, Curator in Charge 

 Victor G. Springer, Associate Curator 

 William R. Taylor, Associate Curator 

 Stanley H. Weitzman, Associate Curator 

 Robert H. Gibbs, Jr., Associate Curator 

 Doris M. Cochran, Curator in Charge 

 James A. Peters, Associate Curator 

 George E. Watson, Curator in Charge 

 Richard L. Zusi, Associate Curator 

 Paul Slud, Associate Curator 

 Charles O. Handley, Jr., Curator in Charge 

 Henry W. Setzer, Associate Curator 

 David H. Johnson, Research Curator 

 Joseph Rosewater, Acting Chairman 

 Fenner A. Chace, Jr., Senior Scientist 

 Horton H. Hobbs, Jr., Senior Scientist 

 Joseph Britton, Systematic Zoologist 

 Raymond B. Manning, Curator in Charge 

 Thomas E. Bowman, Associate Curator 

 J. Laurens Barnard, Associate Curator 

 Louis S. Kornicker, Associate Curator 

 Roger F. Cressey, Jr., Associate Curator 

 David L. Pawson, Curator in Charge 

 Klaus Rutzler, Associate Curator 

 Meredith L. Jones, Curator in Charge 

 Marian H. Pettibone, Associate Curator 

 W. Duane Hope, Associate Curator 

 Mary E. Rice, Associate Curator 

 Joseph Rosewater, Curator in Charge 

 Joseph P. E. Morrison, Associate Curator 

 Harald A. Rehder, Research Curator 

 Karl V. Krombein, Chairman 

 J. F. Gates Clarke, Senior Scientist 

 Oliver S. Flint, Jr., Curator in Charge 




400 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 APPENDIX 



Lepidoptera 



Coleoptera 



Hemiptera 



Myriapoda and Arachnida 

 Botany 



Phanerogams 



Ferns 



Grasses 

 Cryptogams 



Plant Anatomy 

 Fungi 



Paleobiology 



Invertebrate Paleontology 



Vertebrate Paleontology 



Donald R. Davis, Curator in Charge 

 W. Donald Duckworth, Associate Curator 

 William D. Field, Associate Curator 

 Oscar L. Cartwright, Curator in Charge 

 Paul J. Spangler, Associate Curator 

 Richard C. Froeschner, Curator in Charge 

 Ralph E. Crabill, Jr., Curator in Charge 

 William L. Stern, Chairman 

 Lyman B. Smith, Senior Scientist 

 John J. Wurdack, Curator in Charge 

 Wallace R. Ernst, Associate Curator 

 Dan H. Nicolson, Associate Curator 

 Velva E. Rudd, Associate Curator 

 Stanwyn G. Shetler, Associate Curator 

 Conrad V. Morton, Curator in Charge 

 David B. Lellinger, Associate Curator 

 Thomas R. Soderstrom, Curator in Charge 

 Mason E. Hale, Jr., Curator in Charge 

 E. Yale Dawson, Curator* 

 Paul S. Conger, Associate Curator 

 Harold E. Robinson, Associate Curator 

 William L. Stern, Acting Curator in Charge 

 Richard H. Eyde, Associate Curator 

 Chester R. Benjamin, Honorary Curator 

 John A. Stevenson, Honorary Curator 

 John L. Cunningham, Honorary Curator 

 Marie L. Farr, Honorary Curator 

 Paul Lewis Lentz, Honorary Curator 

 Francis A. Uecker, Honorary Curator 

 G. Arthur Cooper, Chairman 

 Richard S. Boardman, Curator in Charge 

 Porter M. Kier, Associate Curator 

 Richard Cifelli, Associate Curator 

 Erle G. Kauffman, Associate Curator 

 Martin A. Buzas, Associate Curator 

 Richard M. Benson, Associate Curator 

 Kenneth M. Towe, Associate Curator 

 Thomas R. Waller, Associate Curator 

 Richard A. Robison, Associate Curator 

 C. Lewis Gazin, Curator in Charge 

 David H. Dunkle, Associate Curator 

 Nicholas Hotton III, Associate Curator 

 Clayton E. Ray, Associate Curator 



*Deceased June 23, 1966. 




STAFF 



401 



Paleobotany 



Sedimentology 

 Mineral Sciences 

 Meteorites 



Mineralogy 

 Petrology 



Francis M. Hueber, Curator in Charge 

 Walter H. Adey, Associate Curator 

 Jack W. Pierce, Curator in Charge 

 George S. Switzer, Chairman 

 Kurt Fredriksson, Curator in Charge 

 Edward P. Henderson, Curator 

 Roy S. Clarke, Jr., Chemist 

 Paul E.Desautels, Associate Curator in Charge 

 William G. Melson, Associate Curator in 

 Charge 



Director 



Assistant Director 

 Office of the Director 



Associates in Ecology 



NATIONAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK 

 T. H. Reed 

 John Perry, 



Travis E. Fauntleroy, Assistant to the Direc- 

 tor 

 John Eisenberg, Resident Scientist 

 Donald R. Dietlein, Manager of the Animal 



Department 

 Clinton W. Gray, Veterinarian 

 Marian P. McCrane, Zoologist 

 Helmut K. Buechner, Lee M. Talbot 



SMITHSONIAN TROPICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE 



Director Martin H. Moynihan 



Biologists Robert L. Dressler, A. Stanley Rand, Neal 



G. Smith 



RADIATION BIOLOGY LABORATORY 



Director William H. Klein 



Assistant Director Walter A. Shropshire, Jr. 



Biochemists David L. Correll, Maurice M. Margulies, 



Francesco Parenti, Robert L. Weintraub 



Cytogeneticist Te-Hsiu Ma 



Geochemist Austin Long 



Physicist Bernard Goldberg 



Plant Physiologists Victor B. Elstad, Bernard Nebel, Leonard 



Price 



Electronic Engineer Junius H. Harrison 



Instrument Engineering Darnel G. Talbert 

 Technician 




402 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 APPENDIX 



ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY 



Director Fred L. Whipple 



Assistant Director (Science) Charles A. Lundquist 



Assistant Director (Management) Carlton W. Tillinghast 



Scientific Staff 



Consultants 



Research Associates 



Leendert Aardoom, Eugene H. Avrett, 

 Nathaniel P. Carleton, Willard R. Chap- 

 pell, Giuseppe Colombo, Matthias F. Co- 

 merford, Allan F. Cook, Robert J. Davis, 

 James C. deFelice, Charles H. Dugan, 

 Giovanni G. Fazio, Edward L. Fireman, 

 Enrichetta E. Forti, Giuseppe Forti, 

 Fred A. Franklin, Manfred P. Friedman, 

 Edward M. Gaposchkin, Owen J. Ginge- 

 rich, Antanas Girnius, Mario D. Grossi, 

 Salah E. Hamid, Gerald S. Hawkins, 

 Henry F. Helmken, Paul W. Hodge, 

 William M. Irvine, Luigi G. Jacchia, 

 Wolfgang Kalkofen, Walter J. Kohn- 

 lein, Yoshihide Kozai, Myron Lecar, 

 Anthony R. Lee, Carlton G. Lehr, 

 A. Edward Lilley, Brian G. Marsden, 

 Ursula B. Marvin, Richard E. McCrosky, 

 Jean Meffroy, Donald H. Menzel, Henri 

 E. Mitler, Robert W. Noyes, Costas 

 Papaliolios, Cecilia H. Payne-Gaposchkin, 

 Douglas T. Pitman, James B. Pollack, 

 Annette G. Posen, George B. Rybicki, 

 Carl Sagan, Jack W. Slowey, Leonard 

 H. Solomon, Richard B. Southworth, 

 Stephen E. Strom, David Tilles, Sachiko 

 Tsuruta, Chi- Yuen Wang, Charles A. 

 Whitney, John A. Wood, Frances W. 

 Wright, James P. Wright. 



Giorgio Fiocco, Yusuke Hagihara, David 

 G. Hummer, William M. Kaula, Colin 

 S. L. Keay, Czeslaw P. Kentzer, Irving 

 Michelson, Eduardo O. Patino, A. E. 

 Ringwood, Juan Roderer, Winfield W. 

 Salisbury, Mario R. Schaffner, William 

 E. Strange, Bhuwan M. Tripathy, Fran- 

 cis X. Tuoti, George Veis 



Ralph F. Baierlein, Robert H. McCorkell, 

 Thornton L. Page, Ladislav Sehnal 




STAFF 



Central Bureau for Satellite Jan Rolff, Executive Director 



Geodesy 

 Central Bureau for Astronomical Owen J. Gingerich, Director 



Telegrams 



403 



SCIENCE INFORMATION EXCHANGE 



Director 



Deputy Director 

 Associate Directors 



Executive Officer 



Monroe E. Freeman 



David F. Hersey 



Willis R. Foster, Life Sciences 



Frank J. Kreysa, Physical Sciences 



Harvey Marron, Operations 



V. P. Verfuerth 



MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY 



Director 



Assistant Director 

 Liaison Editor 

 Administrative Officer 

 Science and Technology 



Physical Sciences 



Mechanical and Civil 

 Engineering 



Electricity 

 Transportation 



Medical Sciences 



Robert P. Multhauf 



Silvio A. Bedini 



Roger Pineau 



Virginia Beets 



Walter F. Cannon, Chairman 



Mrs. Deborah J. Warner, Assistant Curator 



Walter F. Cannon, Acting Curator; in charge 

 of Sections of Astronomy, Chemistry, Mete- 

 orology, and Physics 



Uta C. Merzbach, Associate Curator, Sec- 

 tions of Mathematics and Antique Instru- 

 ments 



Robert M. Vogel, Associate Curator in 

 Charge; Sections of Heavy Machinery and 

 Civil Engineering 



Edwin A. Battison, Associate Curator; Sec- 

 tions of Light Machinery and Horology 



Monte A. Calvert, Associate Curator, Sec- 

 tion of Tools 



Bernard S. Finn, Curator 



Howard I. Chapelle, Curator 



Melvin H. Jackson, Associate Curator, Section 

 of Marine Transportation 



John H. White, Jr., Associate Curator, Sec- 

 tion of Land Transportation 



Sami K. Hamarneh, Curator; in charge of 

 Sections of Medical and Dental Histoiy and 

 Pharmaceutical History and Health 




404 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — APPENDIX 



Arts and Manufactures 



Manufactures and Heavy 



Industries 

 Agriculture and Forest 



Products 

 Textiles 



Ceramics and Glass 



Graphic Arts 



Civil History 



Political History 



Cultural History 



Philately and Postal History 

 Numismatics 



Armed Forces History 

 Military History 



Naval History 



American Studies 



Growth of the United States 



Philip W. Bishop, Chairman 

 Philip W. Bishop, Acting Curator 

 John N. Hoffman, Associate Curator 

 John T. Schlebecker, Curator 



Mrs. Grace Rogers Cooper, Curator 



Rita J. Adrosko, Associate Curator 



Paul V. Gardner, Curator 



J. Jefferson Miller II, Associate Curator 



Jacob Kainen, Curator 



Peter Morse, Associate Curator 



Eugene Ostroff, Associate Curator; Section 



of Photography 

 Richard H. Howland, Chairman 

 Keith E. Melder, Associate Curator in Charge 

 Mrs. Margaret B. Klapthor, Associate 



Curator 

 Mrs. Anne W. Murray, Associate Curator 

 Herbert R. Collins, Assistant Curator 

 Mrs. Claudia B. Kidwell, Assistant Curator 

 C. Malcolm Watkins, Curator 

 Richard E. Ahlborn, Associate Curator 

 John T. Fesperman, Jr., Concert Director 

 Mrs. Cynthia A. Hoover, Associate Curator 

 Rodris C. Roth, Associate Curator 

 Carl H. Scheele, Associate Curator in Charge 

 Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli, Curator 

 Mrs. Elvira Clain-Stefanelli, Associate 



Curator 

 Mendel L. Peterson, Chairman 

 Edgar M. Howell, Curator 

 Craddock R. Goins, Jr., Associate Curator 

 Philip K. Lundeberg, Curator 

 Wilcomb E. Washburn, Chairman 

 Peter C. Welsh, Curator 

 Ann Castrodale, Assistant Curator 



NATIONAL AIR AND SPACE MUSEUM 



Director 



Assistant Director {Astro- 

 nautics) 



Assistant Director {Education 

 and Information) 



Visual Information Officer 



S. Paul Johnston 

 Frederick G. Durant 



Paul E. Garber 



James A. Mahoney 




STAFF 



405 



Flight Craft 

 Flight Materiel 

 Flight Propulsion 

 Presentation and Restoration 



Louis C. Casey, Curator in Charge 

 Kenneth E. Newland, Curator in Charge 

 Robert B. Meyer, Curator in Charge 

 Walter M. Male, Facilities Manager 



NATIONAL ARMED FORCES MUSEUM ADVISORY BOARD 



Director 



Assistant Director 

 Museum Specialist 

 Advisory Board 

 Members 



Ex Officio 



Col. John H. Magruder III 



James S. Hutchins 



Col. Robert M. Calland 



John Nicholas Brown, Chairman 



Chief Justice of the United States, Secre- 

 tary of Army, Secretary of Navy, 

 Secretary of Air Force, David Lloyd 

 Kreeger, Henry Bradford Washburn, 

 Jr., William H. Perkins, Jr., James H. 

 Cassell, Jr. 



Secretary of Defense, Secretary of the 

 Smithsonian Institution 



FREER GALLERY OF ART 



Director 



Assistant Director 



Head Curator {Near Eastern 



Art) 

 Associate Curator {Chinese Art) 

 Head, Technical Laboratory 



John A. Pope 

 Harold P. Stern 

 Richard Ettinghausen 



William Trousdale 

 Rutherford J. Gettens 



NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS 



Director 



Assistant to the Director 

 Assistant for Special Services 

 Special Consultants {Art) 



Curator {Painting and Sculp- 

 ture) 



Curator {Exhibits) 



Curator {Information and 

 Lending) 



Chief, International Art Pro- 



gram 



Librarian 



David W. Scott 



Donald R. McClelland 



John Latham 



Mrs. Adelyn Dohme Breeskin, Stefan P. 



Mu.NSING 



Richard P. Wunder 



Harry Lowe 

 Rowland Lyon* 



Lois Bingham 



William Walker 



*Deceased October 21 1966. 




406 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 — APPENDIX 



Administrative Officers 

 Smithsonian Art Commission 



Members 



Members Emeritus 



Harry W. Zichterman, Mrs. Louise VV. 



Robinson 

 Edgar P. Richardson, Chairman 

 Gilmore D. Clarke, Vice Chairman 

 S. Dillon Ripley, Secretary 

 Page Cross, David E. Finley, Lloyd Good 



rich, Walker Hancock, Bartlett H. 



Hayes, Jr., Wilmarth S. Lewis, Henry P. 



McIlhenny, Paul Mellon, Ogden M. 



Pleissner, Charles H. Sawyer, Stow 



Wengenroth, Andrew Wyeth 

 Leonard Carmichael, Alexander Wetmore 



Director 



Historian 



Curator 



Assistant Historian 



Librarian 



Design Consultant 



Assistants 



Commission 



Ex Officio 



NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 



Charles Nagel 

 Daniel J. Reed 

 Robert G. Stewart 

 Mrs. Virginia Purdy 

 William Walker 

 Victor Proetz 



Mrs. Genevieve A. Kennedy, Museum Special- 

 ist 

 Mrs. Marcia Simon, Research Assistant 

 Mrs. Pamela Christoffel, Research Assistant 

 Lewis T. McInnis, Museum Technician 

 John Nicholas Brown, Chairman, Catherine 

 Drinker Bowen, Julian P. Boyd, Lewis 

 Deschler, David E. Finley, Edgar P. 

 Richardson, Wilmarth Sheldon Lewis, 

 Richard H. Shryock, Col. Frederick P. 

 Todd 

 Chief Justice of the United States 

 Secretary, Smithsonian Institution 

 Director, National Gallery of Art 



NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART 



Trustees 



Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United 

 States, Chairman 



Dean Rusk, Secretary of State 



Henry H. Fowler, Secretary of the Treasury 



S. Dillon Ripley, Secretary of the Smith- 

 sonian Institution 



Paul Mellon, John Hay Whitney, John N. 

 Irwin II, Lessing J. Rosenwald, Franklin 

 D. Murphy 




STAFF 407 



President Paul Mellon 



Vice President John Hay Whitney 



Secretary-Treasurer Ernest R. Feidler 



Director John Walker 



Administrator E. James Adams 



General Counsel Ernest R. Feidler 



Chief Curator Perry B. Cott 



Assistant Director J. Carter Brown 



JOHN F. KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS 



Chairman Roger L. Stevens 



Officers Robert O. Anderson, Vice Chairman 



Sol M. Linowitz, Vice Chairman 

 Ralph E. Becker, General Counsel 

 Daniel W. Bell, Treasurer 

 K. LeMoyne Billings, Secretary 

 Philip J. Mullin, Assistant Secretary and 



Administrative Officer 

 Herbert D. Lawson, Assistant Treasurer 

 Kenneth Birgfeld, Assistant Treasurer 

 Paul Seltzer, Assistant Treasurer 

 L. Corrin Strong, Chairman Emeritus 



INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE SERVICE 



Chief J. A. Collins 



Honorary Smithsonian Fellows, Associates, Collaborators, 

 Custodians of Collections, and Honorary Curators 



NATURAL SCIENCES 



Anthropology John M. Campbell (Archeology), Sister Inez 



Hilger (Ethnology), C. G. Holland (Arche- 

 ology), Neil M. Judd (Archeology), Olga 

 Linares de Sapir (Archeology), Betty J. 

 Meggers (Archeology), Frank H. H. Rob- 

 erts, Jr. (Archeology),* Matthew W. 

 Stirling (Archeology), William J. Tobin 

 (Physical Anthropology), Douglas Taylor 

 (Ethnology), Theodore A. Wertime (Arche- 

 ology), Nathalie F. S. Woodbury (Arche- 

 ology) 



*Deceased February 23, 1966. 




408 



SMITHSONIAN YEAR 1966 APPENDIX 



Vertebrate ^oology 



Invertebrate ^oology 



Entomology 



Botany 



Paleobiology 



Mineral Sciences 



John W. Aldrich (Birds), Oliver L. Austin, 

 Jr. (Birds), Leonard Carmichael (Psychol- 

 ogy and Animal Behavior), Herbert G. 

 Deign an (Birds), Robert W. Ficken (Birds), 

 Herbert Friedmann (Birds), Laurence 

 Irving (Birds), E. V. Komarek (Mammals), 

 Richard H. Manville (Mammals), 

 Edgardo Mondolfi (Mammals), Robert 

 B. Paine (Birds), Michael Palmieri (Birds), 

 Dioscoro S. Rabor (Birds), Lester L. 

 Short (Birds), Alexander Wetmore 

 (Birds), John G. Williams (Birds) 



Willard W. Becklund (Helminthology), 

 J. Bruce Bredin (Biology), Maybelle H. 

 Chitwood (Worms), Ailsa M. Clark 

 (Marine Invertebrates), Elisabeth Deich- 

 mann (Echinoderms), Waldo L. Schmitt 

 (Marine Invertebrates), Frank R. Schwen- 

 gel (Mollusks), Gilbert L. Voss (Mollusks), 

 Mrs. Mildred Stratton Wilson (Copepod 

 Crustacea) 



William H. Anderson (Coleoptera), Doris H. 

 Blake (Coleoptera), Frank L. Campbell 

 (Insect Physiology), Domiciano Dias 

 (Insect Ecology), K. C. Emerson (Malloph- 

 aga), Frank M. Hull (Diptera), William 

 L. Jellison (Siphonaptera, Anoplura), Carl 

 F. W. Muesebeck (Hymenoptera), Thomas 

 E. Snyder (Isoptera), Robert Traub 

 (Siphonaptera) 



Jose Cuatrecasas (Flora of Tropical South 

 America), Elbert L. Little, Jr. (Den- 

 drology), Floyd A. McClure (Bamboos), 

 Kittie F. Parker (Compositae), Egbert H. 

 Walker (Myrsinaceae, Eastern Asian Floras) 



C. Wythe Cooke (Intertebrate Paleontology), 

 J. Thomas Dutro (Invertebrate Paleon- 

 tology), Remington Kellogg (Vertebrate 

 Paleontology), Axel A. Olsson (Inverte- 

 brate Paleontology), Franco Rasetti (In- 

 vertebrate Paleontology), Wendell P. Wood- 

 ring (Invertebrate Paleontology) 



Edward P. Henderson (Meteorites), John B. 

 Jago (Mineralogy), Gunnar Kullerud 

 (Meteorites), Rosser Reeves (Mineralogy), 

 Harry Winston (Mineralogy), Waldemar 

 T. Schaller (Mineralogy) 




STAFF 



409 



National Zoological Park 



Smithsonian Astrophysical 



Observatory 

 Smithsonian Tropical Research 



Institute 



Exhibits 



Science and Technology 

 Arts and Manufactures 

 Civil History 



Armed Forces History 

 Freer Gallery of Art 

 National Air Museum 

 Smithsonian Press 



Jean Delacour, E. P. Walker, Constance 



Warner 

 Charles G. Abbot 



Charles F. Bennett, Jr., Robert H. Mag- 

 Arthur, Ernst Mayr, Giles W. Mead, 

 W. John Smith, C. C. Soper, Martin 

 Young 



W. L. Brown (Taxidermy) 



Derek J. de Solla Price 



Hans Syz (Ceramics) 



Mrs. Arthur M. Greenwood (Cultural 

 History), Elmer C. Herber (History), 

 Ivor Noel Hume (Cultural History), Fred 

 W. McKay (Numismatics), Mrs. Emery 

 May Norweb (Numismatics), R. Henry 

 Norweb (Numismatics), Mrs. Joan Pear- 

 son Watkins (Cultural History) 



William Rea Furlong, Frederic C. Lane, 

 Byron McCandless 



Oleg Grabar, Max Loehr, Katherine N. 

 Rhoades 



Frederick C. Crawford, Alfred V. Ver- 

 ville 



Paul H. Oehser 













