In a paper to be published in a forthcoming issue of Deep Sea Research the first occurrence of a deepwater coral structure out- side of the North Atlantic is recorded. This structure was dis- covered by Dr. Donald F. Squires in the Sub-Antarctic Islands of New Zealand while he was cooperating with the New Zealand Oceanographic Institute's oceanographic program in that region. Coupling his knowledge of living coral structures of the eastern coast of the United States with study of the deepwater fossil structure in New Zealand, Dr. Squires was able to postulate sequences in the development of the coral structure. Stages of development lead from a colony of coral up to several meters in diameter through the accumulation of dead skeletal material and living animals in distinctive communities to form a coral bank several kilometers in diameter and as high as 50-60 meters. Intermediate stages of development, termed "thicket" and "coppice," have been identified in the fossil record.
Several important scientific discoveries were made by the department of mineral sciences during the past year. These include the discovery by Dr. Kurt Fredriksson, division of meteorites, of a glass with inclusions of metallic nickel-iron in the Chainpur chondrite. This discovery, which was studied in detail with the division's new electron microprobe, is of funda- mental importance in determining the origin of chondrules and of chondritic meteorities in general.
As part of a cooperative study with Woods Hole and Scripps Oceanographic Institutions, Dr. William G. Melson of the divi- sion of petrology discovered metabasalts in ocean dredge samples from the Mid- Atlantic Ridge. Such rocks may require modifications of existing theories about the origin of the Mid- Atlantic Ridge, and about processes of rock formation beneath the sea floor.
In a study of yucca moths, Dr. Donald R. Davis has proved beyond doubt the close relationship between agave and yucca through the habits of the moths. The two genera of plants have always been placed in two families, but the evidence concerning the moths suggests that the two genera of plants should be associated in one.
In a study of material collected on the mid-Pacific Island of Rapa, Dr. J. F. Gates Clarke has found that an ancient connec- tion between the fauna of Rapa with those of Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa is apparent.
In the area of anthropology Dr. K. V. Flannery's preliminary research in the Valley of Oaxaca, southern Mexico, has verified the presence in many of the caves and rockshelters of abundant perishable remains of human occupation, and has determined that the corn cobs, cactus fruits, fragments of squash, etc., and associated artifacts came from the period 6500-2500 B.C. During this time the development of domesticated plants and of techniques for growing them provided the basis of the all important change to settled village life, rapid population growth, and increasingly complex socioeconomic and religious systems. Thus Oaxaca joins a few other localities in Mexico in developing the prerequisities of civilization as we presently are inclined to describe it.
Dr. W. H. Crocker continued his field work among the Canela Indians of Brazil. He found that under the pressure of expand- ing non-Indian settlement and the destruction of their simple way of life, they were experiencing a messianic movement, led by a prophetess whom he was able to study at first hand. Rarely has a social scientist been able to observe at close quarters the social, psychological, and ecological revolution that a people undergoes with the impact of shattering external contacts — a microcosm of much of the upheaval today throughout the world's developing nations.
For more than 19 years the Smithsonian has administered the Panama Canal Zone Biological area, whose scientists are engaged primarily in behavioral and ecological studies. Four Smith- sonian staff members are currently employed. Dr. Martin Moynihan is investigating the evolution of behavior in New World primates and passerines, particularly the evolution of
In American studies, a wide variety of techniques were employed in field, laboratory, and library to advance the research program of the Museum of History and Technology. Among the year's accomplishments have been the perfection of underwater surveying and measuring methods by Mendel L. Peterson in exploring a late 16th-century shipwreck off Bermuda; the use of tape recorder and camera by Mr. and Mrs. C. Malcolm Watkins in recording the survival of folk potterymaking in Moore County, North Carolina; and the completion of a 700- page manuscript, The Origins of Chemistry, based upon studies of archival and printed sources, by Dr. Robert P. Multhauf. In addition, John C. Ewers has prepared a book, Artists of the Old West, profusely illustrated with reproductions in black-and-white and color of historically significant drawings and paintings from museum collections of the United States, Canada, and Europe.
The customary informal dinner meeting, preceding the annual meeting, was held on January 27, 1965, in the reception room of the Museum of History and Technology. Dr. Richard S. Cowan spoke on "The Smithsonian Institution's Bredin-Arch- bold Biological Survey of Dominica"; Mendel L. Peterson on "New Methods of Surveying Ancient Shipwrecks" ; and Dr. I. E. Wallen on "Oceanography in the Smithsonian."
The annual meeting was held on January 28, 1965, in the conference room of the Museum of History and Technology. The Secretary presented his published annual report on the activities of the Institution. The chairman of the Executive and Permanent Committees of the Board, Dr. Robert V. Fleming, gave the financial report for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1964.
Dr. A. G. W. Cameron, senior scientist, Goddard Institute for Space Studies, Columbia University, gave the 30th Annual James Arthur Lecture on the Sun on the evening of March 10, 1965, in the auditorium of the Freer Gallery of Art. His subject was "The Early History of the Sun."
Smithsonian Office of Anthropology. — On February 1, 1965, the Bureau of American Ethnology and the Department of Anthropology of the Museum of Natural History were com- bined to form the new Smithsonian Office of Anthropology under the Museum of Natural History. This consolidation unites the efforts and resources of the Institution in modern programs in ethnology, linquistics, archeology, and physical anthropology. Dr. Richard B. Woodbury was appointed its acting head. Activities of the new office as well as the bureau's accomplishments in the past year are given on pages 39-53 of this report.
Division of Education and Training. — Recognition of the Smithsonian's responsibilities and opportunities in research and higher education led to the establishment in October 1964 of the Division of Education and Training. Effective July 1, 1965, Dr. Charles Blitzer was appointed its director. The objective of this new division is to bring about the fullest use of the Insti- tution's resources — both its collections and its distinguished staff of scientists and scholars — and to make these resources available to the scientific and scholarly community at large. This objec- tive is being pursued through a variety of programs.
New flight cage at National Zoological Park was shown to distinguished guests by Secretary and Mrs. S. Dillon Ripley at formal opening in February 1965.
The problem of providing an abstracting service for the fields of conservation and archeological chemistry was studied for the laboratory by Dr. Seymour Lewin, Conservation Center, New York University. His report, which evaluated the problem and outlined a program, is now being used to secure support for a proposed abstract journal. Professor Cyril Smith, who visited the laboratory for one week, prepared reports on the organization of the laboratory and on the metallographic examination of objects from Ecuador.
Fortunately, the extensive file of published and unpublished reports, diaries, and other records pertaining to the area, organized by Edwin H. Bryan, Jr., manager of the Pacific Scientific Information Center at the Bernice P. Bishop Museum, and the extensive files of Dr. F. Ray- mond Fosberg of the U.S. Geological Survey have been placed at the service of the Smithsonian. From these and other sources can be learned the extent to which man has disturbed the ecology of some of these Pacific islands. For example, over a period of about two decades during the latter part of the 19th century, approximately 125,000 tons of guano were removed from Howland, a remote desert island only eight-tenths of a square mile in area. In the 1930's this island was colonized, and three airplane runways, each 150 feet wide, were built, preempting 7 percent of its total area. And in the early years of World War II it was shelled or bombed at various times.
Studies of the distribution and ecology of terrestrial plants on islands of the central Pacific, in which Dr. Charles Lamoureaux and Mr. Robert Long, of the University of Hawaii, are collaborating with the Smithsonian Institution, are important not only in developing an inventory of plants on each of the islands and a history of plant intro- ductions, but also to an understanding of the factors affecting the distribution and abundance of terrestrial animals.
Through the Sorting Center, technician Jack Rudloe was employed to make special collections as a professional collector during the Inter- national Indian Ocean Expedition; T. Peter Lowe worked as a tech- nician in lieu of a scientist on the Anton Bruun; and Mrs. LaNelle Peter- son and Mrs. Cynthia Stoertz participated as professional collectors in a cruise of the Eltanin in the Antarctic in early 1965.
Joseph P. E. Morrison, who continues work upon brackish-water mollusks, also collected in the southeastern United States and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Mrs. Mildred Stratton Wilson, who has been mono- graphing the freshwater calanoid copepod crustaceans of North Amer- ica, in an attempt to develop a geographic and physiographic index to the faunal composition of individual bodies of water, had her work delayed as a result of damage to her laboratory and library in the Alaskan earthquake of 1964.
Research associate Doris H. Blake continued her study of the Chrys- omelidae of the Western Hemisphere. She completed two papers and is presently revising the genus Glyptoscelis. Mrs. Blake devoted five weeks to research at the Science Museum, Institute of Jamaica, and on several field trips there she acquired new material for the national collection.
Physical renovation of office and storage space in the Office of Anthro- pology, and the administrative reorganization of the Office, have both necessitated and made possible extensive rearrangements and improve- ments in storage facilities and in procedures for processing, accessioning, and cataloging new specimens. The 5000 drawers of skeletal material were placed in an alphabetical arrangement of states and foreign countries, with a special placing of the Huntington collection of early 20th-century Americans (largely born abroad). This work was skill- fully supervised by Donald Ortner. The African collections were placed in a systematic, geographical arrangement, and within each major area many objects formerly arranged by type were rearranged by tribe. The Old World archeological collections were rearranged. And the Smithsonian's sizable collection of Japanese ceramics was classified according to geographic regions and to the kilns of Japan. Objects resulting from acculturation, whether made for export or for sophisticated local use, were placed apart from the traditional specimens. Rearrangement and reidentification of the Japanese ceramics were greatly facilitated by the assistance of Mr. and Mrs. Victor Hauge.
Under grants from the National Science Foundation more than 10,000 water beetles and 14,133 specimens of Ataenius have been prepared for critical study. The transfer of Hemiptera collections into the unit tray system was completed this year. Carl J. Drake continued to improve the Drake collection so that now the combined Museum and Drake material contain more than 80 percent (1491) of the 1820 species of the family Tingidae (lacebugs). Research associate Carl F. W. Muesebeck and members of the Department of Agriculture staff have added to the collection of Hymenoptera large deposits of specimens from biological studies. Approximately 20,000 newly acquired specimens of Lepidoptera were prepared and sorted by Mrs. Joan M. Ledbetter, and approximately 2500 North American chrysaugine moths were consolidated and reorganized by summer intern E. D. Cashatt. The New World Glyphipterygidae were reclassified and
An important achievement concerns the enormous F. C. Bishopp col- lection of ticks, of which, when it was received, practically all of the specimens were dried out. During the past year Mrs. Sophie G. Lutterlough restored 35,000 specimens by treating them with trisodium- phosphate solution and then reintroducing them into alcohol. The gradual introduction of trisodium-phosphate solution into the vials of dried specimens by means of a large syringe avoids disturbing the specimens and thus prevents damage. Ralph E. Crabill and Mrs. Lutterlough have restored, relabeled, and rehoused 3000 myriapods and arachnids, among which 40 unsuspected type specimens were found. In addition, 1118 microscope slides were cleaned and sorted, and 14,600 specimens from the Hopkins collection were treated.
Among the outstanding ethnological Asian materials received and accessioned are the Tokyo National Museum collection, with 54 speci- mens including rural tools and basketry; the Government of the Ryukyu Islands collection, with 71 items emphasizing the wide range existing in traditional textile production; the Beue Tann collection, with 49 objects related to Chinese calligraphy; 16 exceptional examples of Japanese folk art, from Mr. and Mrs. Victor Hauge; 23 Nepalese carvings, from Paul Rose; and 37 Jewish ritual objects made by well- known Israeli craftsmen, from Dr. and Mrs. Abraham Kanof.
By exchange, 212 specimens of isopods were obtained from the Zoological Institute, Leningrad, U.S.S.R.; and 500 specimens of mol- lusks, from Tonga and the subantarctic islands of New Zealand, were obtained from the Dominion Museum, Wellington, New Zealand. Purchased through the Chamberlain fund were 3290 marine shells from North Borneo, collected by Mrs. Mary Saul, and 610 from Muscat, Oman, by Donald T. Bosch.
Of the many important additions to the mineralogy collections, three were of outstanding importance: Harry Winston, Inc., presented to the Smithsonian in memory of Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, former Chairman of the Board of De Beers Consolidated Mines, Ltd., a magnificent gem-quality diamond crystal weighing 253.7 carats, from the Dutoitspan Mine, Republic of South Africa; John B. Jago of San Francisco donated his collection of minerals, numbering nearly 4000 specimens and generally considered to be the finest contemporary private collection in the United States; and Mr. and Mrs. Lennart Erickson of Palo Alto, Calif., donated three outstanding gems: a 117- carat emerald cabochon brooch, a 126-carat aquamarine, and a 50.5- carat rubellite tourmaline.
Work continued on the preparation and installation of the remaining few exhibits in the Asian hall, and collections already in the Museum were augmented with eight contemporary objects donated by Dr. and Mrs. Abram Kanof through the Jewish Museum in New York, and three specimens given by the Embassy of Israel.
Construction was completed for new physical geology, meteorite, and jade exhibits, and for a major enlargement and revision of the gem exhibit. Paul E. Desautels wrote scripts for all the gem exhibit cases, the design was completed by Mrs. Dorothy Guthrie, and rein- stallation begun. When the gem exhibit was closed for revision in January 1965, a temporary exhibit was set up in the adjacent mineral hall. Edward P. Henderson and William G. Melson began writing scripts for the meteorite and physical geology exhibits, and the design and production of these will be started as soon as the gem and jade rooms are completed and reopened to the public in summer 1965.
Mrs. Lyndon Johnson during inspection of plans for Music on the Mall at the Museum of History and Technology. Secretary Ripley, left, is showing her a bass ophecliede from the collection of musical instruments. Below: Part of audience of over three thousand at concert of band music of the 1860's, played on restored Civil War-period instruments (see p. 109).
C. Malcolm Watkins, curator of cultural history, carried a tape recorder to rural Moore County in North Carolina to record surviving folk-pottery traditions in an area where country folk have made red earthenware and salt-glazed pottery since before the American Revolution. There Ben Owen charmingly recalled how his grand- father had made pottery and described how he himself carried on the family tradition — from the digging of the clay to the removal of the fired pot from the kiln. Mrs. Joan Watkins supplemented the oral account with an extensive series of color photographs of this potter's shop and of the stages in his making of pottery. Examples of this pottery were obtained for the Museum collections.
The sounds of history were sweet indeed in the series of concerts arranged by Mrs. Cynthia Adams Hoover, associate curator of musical instruments, during the year. The November 11, 1964, concert of Gustav Leonhardt, harpsichordist, playing on the Museum's restored
Paul V. Gardner spent six weeks in Europe examining 22 museum and private collections for the purpose of verifying attributions and preparing material for a definitive catalog of the unique collection of 18th-century European porcelains received from Dr. Hans Syz. In the same connection and with the support and cooperation of the Ceramica Stiftung of Basel, Switzerland, arrangements were made by Dr. Syz for consultation in Washington with Dr. Rainer Ruckert, Ober- konservator of the Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, Munich, Germany, who spent the period April 19 through June 14, 1965, working with Dr. Syz and the staff on special problems.
Dr. Syz, who on April 27, 1965, was appointed an honorary fellow of the Smithsonian Institution in recognition of his scholarly contri- butions to the history of ceramics, continues to spend several days every month on the project.
A project idea originated by Mr. Ostroff has resulted in a unique photograph of the United States. This consists of an unbroken aerial color photograph of the United States from the east to the west coast, and, as a result, the longest panoramic picture in the world was pro- duced. The project involved the cooperation of the United States Navy, North American Aviation, Chicago Aerial Industries, and Gen- eral Aniline and Film Corporation.
Mrs. Grace Rogers Cooper continued her research on the spinning wheel and its use in America from the Colonial era through the 19th century.
Concerned with interrelated objectives of research and exhibits, C. Malcolm Watkins and Mrs. Joan Pearson Watkins, research col- laborator, during October sought a post-Gold Rush period ranch house kitchen in northern California to install in the Museum's hall of everyday life in the American past. One was found in a long-aban- doned house, built about 1862 at the foot of Mount Shasta, which exemplifies both the transfer of traditional Eastern folk concepts of farm-house architecture and the adaptation of design to new Western conditions. With the cooperation of George H. Watson, specialist in restoration of old structures, the house was thoroughly analyzed and measured, and its plans were drawn. Mrs. Watkins made a detailed photographic study of it, and interviewed descendants of the builder, a gold-miner-turned-rancher named George Washington Arbaugh, and others.
Mr. Watkins is also engaged in research relative to a frame "salt box" house built in 1853 in Half Moon Bay, San Mateo County. Embodying ideas from 18th- and early 19th-century Eastern proto- types as well as adaptive features typical of California, the house is rich in implications of cultural transfer and cultural change.
Mrs. Elvira Clain-Stefanelli published her Select Numismatic Bibli- ography, a compilation of 4962 titles, arranged by subject, that sum- marize research in numismatics during the past two centuries, including the study of medals and decorations, and a history of prices and related economic and historical problems.
The entire project, under the general supervision of Mrs. Grace R. Cooper, was carried out by museum technician Maureen Collins of the textile laboratory, assisted by museum technician Lois Vann of the division of textiles and museum specialist Donald Kloster of the division of military history.
Under the guidance of museum technician Mrs. Betty J. Walters, considerable progress was made in assembling data on certain phases of the collections for use in a Termatrex data-retrieval system. Ulti- mately, it is expected that major portions of the collections, with their
Indian silhouette weathervane, one of many examples of American folk art in the Eleanor and Mabel Van Alstyne collection, gift of Mrs. Fred Dana Marsh.
With the cooperation of the Fine Hardwoods Association and specialist manufacturers some 200 panels of foreign and domestic woods were presented for incorporation into a decorative screen, designed by the exhibits laboratory, that will provide the hall of forest products with an encyclopedic account of available timbers. For the agriculture collections a fine contemporary model of the first field pick-up hay baler (1932) was received from Mr. Leslie R. Tallman, son of the inventor.
The ceramics collections continued to receive support from previous donors, notably Mrs. William A. Sutherland and Robert H. McCauley. Dr. Hans Syz formally donated 16 extremely valuable items of that part of his collection still on loan to the Museum. Other major gifts were those of Dr. Lloyd Hawes who presented 23 pieces of 18th- century English earthenware, including some excellent examples of polychrome salt glaze; and of Mr. and Mrs. Edward M. Pfiueger, whose gift included an extremely fine pair of Chinoiserie busts from the Bow Factory (ca. 1755).
A splendid set of 31 Venetian views by Antonio Canal (1697-1768), commonly called Canaletto, constituting the entire body of his etchings, was received from Mrs. Francis P. Garvan of New York City. Among other important acquisitions were outstanding examples of German Expressionist printmaking including work by Max Beckmann, Ernst
Colonel and Mrs. Burnett Brown of Lacock Abbey, Wiltshire, the home of W. H. F. Talbot, gave a rare copy of Part VI (April 1846) of the latter's publication The Pencil of Nature, the first book to be illustrated with photographs.
Dr. Zoltan Bay of the National Bureau of Standards deposited the original electron-multiplier developed by him (1938) at the Institute of Atomic Physics of the Royal Hungarian University, Budapest. This apparatus, to be included in the hall of nuclear energy, repre- sented a turning point in the development of instruments for counting elementary particles. An equally critical stage in the study of nuclear physics is represented by the million-volt Van de Graaff accelerator (1931) given by Merle A. Tuve of the Carnegie Institution's Division of Terrestrial Magnetism. Among other achievements, this machine brought protons close enough to atomic nuclei to overwhelm the inher- ent electrical repulsion, and so demonstrated the existence of the short- range nuclear force. Pioneer work among elementary particles was commemorated by Professor Conversi of the Universita degli Studi, Rome, Italy, in the form of a replica of his experiment with Piccioni and others (1941-1943) demonstrating the noncapture of mu mesons.
Plans for the hall of petroleum were virtually completed by agreement with the engineers of various firms for demonstrations of oil production techniques to accompany the actual machinery. A group of oil men in and around Tulsa, Okla., have contributed, through Mr. W. H. Helmerich, a 57-foot mural describing the oil industry. This mural, now being painted by Mr. Delbert Jackson, staff artist of the Pan American Petroleum Corporation, will embellish the entrance to the hall of petroleum.
The Austrian Imperial bridal veil, an outstanding example of Brus- sels Point de Gaze lace, was presented to the textile collections by Mrs. Marjorie Merriweather Post. The veil was worn by Princess Stephanie of Belgium for her wedding to Crown Prince Rudolph in 1881. Scat- tered over the Brussels needlepoint reseau, sheerest of all lace grounds, are garlands and sprays of ferns and flowers of many kinds. The crown of the veil is powdered with tiny rosebuds, while the double-headed eagle of Austria dominates the center back. The arms of the provinces of Austria and Belgium form the border, with the arms of Belgium at the center.
The collections were enriched in a variety of ways. The Honorable David K. E. Bruce presented numerous objects of French and English decorative arts and furniture. Mrs. Gustave A. Murman gave the woodwork of a Federal-period parlor from a house in Martha's Vine- yard, Mass. This room is remarkable for the primitive landscape painting that appears in an oval cartouche in the rectangular over- mantel panel above the fireplace. The room, with contemporary furniture, will be installed in the hall of everyday life in the American past. It was moved from its site by the Museum's restoration specialist, George H. Watson. The Eleanor and Mabel Van Alstyne collection, containing outstanding examples of folk art of the United States, was given by Mrs. Fred Dana Marsh. In addition to the kitchen of the George Washington Arbaugh ranch house in Siskiyou County, Calif., discovery of which is described on pages 118 and 138, the collections of
At a ceremony on December 18, 1964, Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson contributed to the First Ladies collection a most significant addition, the satin evening dress worn by her at a state dinner at the White House in December 1964. Presented by Mrs. Gladys P. Lehmann was one of a group of 188 arm chairs ordered in 1818 by Henry Clay and used in the United States House of Representatives until 1857. The chair, upholstered in its original black horsehair, bears the label of the maker, T. Constantine and Company of New York City. The Honorable John W. McCormack, Speaker of the House, presented the Museum with the flag flown at the Capitol during the time the body of President Kennedy was lying in state.
Among the pieces of unusually fine jewelry given by Mrs. Merri- weather Post are a necklace of diamonds and oriental emeralds and a ring set with a large oblong emerald. Her daughter, Mme. Leon Barzin, gave a pair of pear-shaped diamond earrings once owned by Marie Antionette; another daughter, Mrs. Augustus Riggs IV, presented a seed-pearl bag with platinum frame set with rubies, emeralds, and sapphires.
From the Stack family in New York came many donations, among which should be noted particularly a group of trial impressions of United States coins and pay orders signed in 1795 by David Ritten- house, first Director of the United States Mint. Mr. Willis H. du Pont added to his previous gifts of Russian coins, formerly owned by the Grand Duke G. Mikhailovitch, a group of 923 coins and medals in silver and bronze encompassing the period from Catherine II to Alexander I. Mrs. Wayte Raymond contributed over 2000 foreign coins struck during the 19th and 20th centuries. A well-rounded collection of coins of Nepal from the 1 7th through the 20th century was presented by Mr. Paul W. Rose.
Outstanding among the philatelic objects acquired is a unique cover and its enclosure, carried by John Wise in his balloon Jupiter, August 17, 1859, from Lafayette, Ind., on the first attempt to carry American mail by air under authority of postal officials. The cover was pur- chased through the Charles and Rosanna Batchelor fund and the Milton A. Holmes Memorial fund. A specialized collection of 2392 stamps of various nations commemorating Rotary International was received from Dr. Joseph H. Kler of New Brunswick, N.J. Portions of this collection, important for its scope and completeness, were exhibited at a special ceremony in Washington, D.C., held to observe the issuance of new Rotary commemorative stamps by the Republic of China. An additional 80,000 postage stamps, with perforated initials, were given by Mr. and Mrs. Victor J. Van Lint of Riverside, Calif., and additional essays, proofs, and photographs of the stamps of China were given by Mr. and Mrs. R. O. D. Hopkins of Contoocook, N.H.
The Medal of Honor and other decorations, orders, and service medals awarded Major George G. McMurtry for conspicuous gallantry in action with the "Lost Battalion" in World War I were presented by Mrs. McMurtry. The Medal of Honor is the only example of this unique decoration from the modern period, during which it has been rarely awarded, in the national collections. From the Patent Office came an important group of ordnance patent models that supplement the already extensive and unique collection in the division of military history. A rare Confederate cutlass was received from Douglas R. Williams.
An early 18th-century iron naval cannon came to the collections as a gift from the DACOR Corporation through its vice president, Mr. D. L. Davison. This piece was recovered from a site, as yet unidentified, lying on Banner Reef south of Jamaica, West Indies.
The Reifenberg collection, illustrating Israel's ancient history through its coins, was displayed from November 1964 through January 1965. Starting with two exceedingly rare pieces struck in Judaea under Persian rule, the exhibit, featuring a virtually complete series of ancient Judaean coins, was made possible through the cooperation of Mrs. Esther Reifenberg of Jerusalem, and Mr. M. Avida, Director, Cultural Relations Department of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Jerusalem, Israel.
An important and extensive program for utilizing the Museum's ancient instruments in a series of concerts was initiated by Mrs. Cynthia Adams Hoover. In these activities she has been assisted by museum specialist Jay Scott Odell.
Music on the Mall was initiated in May on the Museum's terrace with the National Symphony Orchestra. The Honorable Adlai Steven- son, Ambassador to the United Nations, narrated Aaron Copland's "Lincoln Portrait," and the young pianist Andre Watts played Saint- Saens' Concerto No. 2. Tower music was a weekly feature in summer. Played by five wind musicians from the top of the north portico of the Renwick-designed Smithsonian building, it began the summer Tuesday evening music series in early June. These new developments have materially changed the atmosphere of the Mall lying between the Smithsonian's buildings. Mrs. Hoover collaborated in the extensive research leading to the design and construction of a new music platform and background shell for the outdoor concerts on the terrace.
Several lectures and forums were sponsored in the department of civil history. Stella Mary Newton, advisor to the restoration depart- ment of the National Gallery, London, gave a lecture "Social Impli- cations in the Costumes in Hogarth's Paintings." John Harris, keeper of drawings of the Royal Institute of British Architects, lectured on "William Kent." Scott Symons, formerly assistant-curator-in-charge of the Canadiana collections, The Royal Ontario Museum, lectured publicly on "French Canadiana Versus the American Dream" and gave an intramuseum seminar on the same subject. (Mr. Symons also spent three weeks in residence as a visiting scholar studying the Museum's furniture collections.)
The Zoo received a bequest from the Gordon Gaver estate, consisting of a large number of reptiles, 25 mammals, and 3 birds. Mr. Gaver, who died in August 1964, had for many years owned and operated a roadside snake exhibit near Thurmont, Md. At his death, his entire collection came to the National Zoological Park and made a note- worthy addition. In some instances there were more specimens than the Zoo could exhibit, and these were of great value as exchange material with other zoos.
Space does not permit listing all gifts received during the year, but a complete list of Mr. Gaver's collection, and other gifts of interest, follows:
Fowle, Mrs. Margaret, Bethesda, Md., 4 strawberry finches, orange weaver, 2 cut-throat weavers, 2 African fire finches, Bengalee finch, 7 zebra finches, 2 red-eared waxbills.
The staff of the veterinary section was increased by one medica technologist, Mrs. Janet Davis, who joined the section on March 1 She is a graduate of Oregon State University and has had a broad range of experience in Hawaii and more recently at George Wash- ington Hospital.
The veterinary section was fortunate in having the cooperation and assistance of various specialists in the field of clinical investigation and medicine. Among these are Dr. A. G. Carlson of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.; Dr. F. R. Lucas, director of the Livestock Sanitary Laboratory in Centerville, Md.; Dr. Anthony Morris of the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.; Gen. Joe M. Blumberg and Col. F. M. Garner and their staff of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology.
Two specimens that died during the year may have established longevity records: (1) A Malay porcupine {Acanthion brachyura), col- lected in the vicinity of Pematang Siantar, Sumatra, by the National Geographic-Smithsonian Institution Expedition to the East Indies, was received on September 28, 1937. It died on January 12, 1965, after 27 years 3 months and 15 days in the Zoo. (2) An African lungfish (Protopterus annectens), received on June 10, 1942, as a gift from Dr. Thomas Barbour, director of the Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, was collected in Uganda in 1937. It fed on meat, liver, hearts, frogs, and tadpoles and had many ailments throughout the years, but through use of mud baths managed to pull through. It was in the mud bath for a month prior to its death on September 25, 1964. It had been at the Zoo for 22 years 3 months 15 days and is known to have been in captivity for 5 years previously.
When it is necessary to quarantine animals coming into this country, they are taken to the U.S. Department of Agriculture's station in Clifton, N.J. During the past year, Dr. H. A. Waters and Andy Goodel, two of the officials stationed there, were most cooperative in keeping the National Zoological Park informed as to the well-being of animals and birds being held there for quarantine.
The Smithsonian Institution named three persons as honorary col- laborators in recognition of their contributions to the National Zoologi- cal Park. These were Jean Delacour, world-renowned ornithologist, for his help and advice in stocking the new birdhouse, suggesting which species of birds should be exhibited, and giving valuable counsel in regard to suitable plants; J. Lear Grimmer, former associate director of the National Zoological Park, in recognition of his scientific and manage- ment contributions; and Mrs. Constance P. Warner, who has been associated with the Zoo for the past 8 years, working with the collection as an animal photographer. Mrs. Warner has generously allowed the Zoo to use freely any of her beautiful transparencies for labels and publications.
Dr. Jacchia and Mr. Slowey have also investigated the relation between exospheric temperature and geomagnetic indexes and con- cluded that the former varies with the solar plasma velocities in a nearly linear fashion.
Dr. Manfred Friedman has developed a set of equations to describe the structure of the upper atmosphere. The analysis based on these equations will include effects of thermal conductivity, radiative trans- fer, and diffusion of the different constituents.
A new estimate has been made by Dr. Franco Verniani of the total mass of the earth's atmosphere. The result is (5.136±0.007)X10 21 grams.
Data from satellite tracking have also been used in the study of the geopotential. From precisely reduced observations of nine satellites with inclinations between 28 and 95 degrees, Dr. Yoshihide Kozai has derived new values for the coefficients of the zonal harmonics of the earth's gravitational field through J H . Treating these zonal har- monics as known quantities, Imre Izsak used more than 26,000 obser- vations of 11 satellites with inclinations between 33 and 96 degrees to compute a new set of tesseral harmonics through the sixth degree. Since independent determinations give reasonable agreement on the total contribution of the nonzonal terms to the geopotential, the main features of the geoid seem to be well established.
Basing his work on the results of Dr. Kozai and Mr. Izsak, E. M. Gaposchkin has improved the treatment of perturbations in the Ob-
The shapes for the surfaces of the constant potential and constant gravitation are being studied by Dr. Walter Kohnlein.
Studies of the geophysical significance of satellite gravity results continue. From an analysis of zonal harmonics, Dr. Chi-Yuen Wang has suggested that the load of the last continental ice sheets, which per- sisted some 50,000 years near the end of the Pleistocene, may have de- formed the earth, flattening it near the poles and causing a bulge near the equator. Since the ice sheets retreated only some 11,000 to 15,000 years ago, there has been too little time for a complete isostatic recov- ery of the earth, and the residual of this deformation therefore remains in the earth's ellipticity. Using different approaches, Dr. William Strange and Dr. Wang have been investigating the possible relations between heat-flow and the gravity results.
The rate of accumulation, reduction, and analysis of data from simul- taneous photography of satellites by two or more Baker-Nunn cameras was increased considerably during the year. A cooperative program was initiated with the Air Force to use Baker-Nunn cameras at Oslo, Norway; Cold Lake, Canada; and Johnston Island, Pacific Ocean. 1 These stations were used to provide data to strengthen the solutions for the coordinates of the SAO Baker-Nunn stations by providing a triangular network of stations in North America and Europe and by decreasing the distance between intervisible stations in the Pacific Ocean. From this network of 1 5 stations, we now have data of inter- visibilities that encompass the globe, providing another mathematical condition that enhances the precision of the resultant geodetic infor- mation. About 800 intervisible arcs were precisely reduced during the year, compared to a total of 200 in the previous 3 years. Dr. George Veis, assisted by Leendert Aardoom and Antanas Girnius, analyzed these data to determine more precise station coordinates.
A companion program employed in the Observatory's geodetic studies determines not only the tesseral harmonic coefficients for the geopotential but also improves station coordinates from an analysis of data of orbit dynamics. Mr. Izsak determined a set of more accurate station coordinates at the same time as he solved for the tesseral har- monic coefficients.
A procedure was developed by Dr. Kohnlein to combine the results of the intervisible (geometric) method and those of theorbital (dynamic) method to determine still more accurate station coordinates and the tesseral harmonics through the fourth order. It was gratifying to learn that the geometric and dynamic methods of determining station coordinates were in good agreement. Until this comparison, it was not known whether there might be a difference in the two results due to some unrecognized factor.
Dr. Richard B. Southworth analyzes these films for correlations with solar phenomena and for indications of the physical behavior of comets. As a necessary part of this work, Dr. Southworth is con- ducting an initial study to solve the problem of transferring observed stellar magnitudes to the Baker-Nunn color system. For the deter- mination of the spectral sensitivity of the Baker-Nunn optics, a catalog of published spectrophotometric data on standard stars has been compiled, and microdensitometer measurements have been made on films taken with the camera.
Astrophysical Observing Stations have in past years made photo- metric observations to determine the earth's albedo. 6 In a continuing program, Dr. Fred A. Franklin is testing improved techniques and instrumentation to measure the earthshine on the dark portion of the moon's surface before first quarter and after last quarter. Sun- light reflected from the earth faintly illuminates this part of the moon and can therefore indicate how reflective the earth is.
The automatic camera stations that make up the Prairie Network are providing data on bright meteors that will enable scientists to determine their orbits. In addition, there is the hope that some of the bodies photographed by the network will survive their journey and will be recovered on the earth's surface. Such freshly fallen meteorites can provide valuable data on the history of the objects in space. Dr. Richard E. McCrosky continues to supervise operations and to analyze photographs taken by the network's cameras.
In the study of ionized meteor trails, electronic techniques play an important role. In Havana, 111., a radar installation jointly operated with the Harvard College Observatory, and under the direction of Dr. Gerald S. Hawkins and Dr. Southworth, has yielded observations of some 10,000 meteor trails. 7 These have been electronically measured and reduced. Since they are of both sporadic and stream meteors, they will provide a substantial body of data for research into the astrono- my and physics of meteor particles. 8 Dr. Southworth has been planning and supervising the improvement of the system so that it will be able to achieve greater accuracy of observations and to observe more and fainter meteors.
Dr. Verniani and Dr. Hawkins have revised the ionization proba- bilities involved in the meteor process, thus permitting new estimates of the mass and density for a large sample of faint radio meteors. The mean density from this determination is 1 gm. cm. -3 , and the mass distribution corresponds to that of the brighter photographic meteors observed with Super-Schmidt cameras.
In cooperation with Dr. William G. Elford of the University of Adelaide, Australia, Dr. Hawkins has found the flux of meteors more massive than 10~ 6 gm. to be 40 km. -2 hr." 1 .
Together with Dr. Hawkins and Dr. Verniani, Dr. Southworth has computed the ablation coefficient, which represents the rate of loss of mass by a meteor moving through the atmosphere. With Dr. Elford and Dr. Hawkins, he has determined the distribution of the radiants of sporadic meteors.
To gather data on high-altitude wind velocities and directions, Dr. Mario D. Grossi has designed the necessary modifications of the Havana equipment. 9
The extensive analysis of the atmospheric trajectories of 413 pre- cision-reduced Super-Schmidt meteors, which Dr. Jacchia conducted with the collaboration of Dr. Verniani and Robert E. Briggs, has been completed and is presented in Special Report No. 175. The analysis confirms the importance of fragmentation in the meteor phenomenon and the individual physical characteristics of meteors in different showers, on which Dr. Jacchia reported in past years. From the fact
Collaborating with Chester C. Langway, Jr., of the Army Cold Re- gions Research Laboratory, Dr. Edward L. Fireman is collecting dust samples from melted snow deep within the Greenland ice sheet. Several years ago unwanted heat from a power installation in Greenland was dissipated by a radiator in the ice. The heat melted out a cavern about 110 feet in radius that is now slowly refreezing. Dr. Fireman and Mr. Langway have installed a pump and filters which retrieve from the water the dust that was imbedded in the snow and ice before they were melted. This collection technique is an improvement over that employed in previous years when a filter was used in the camp water supply, which was also derived from melted glacial ice. Using previous collections, an analysis of particles collected from the melting
Dr. Fireman wrote the 3-year summary article on meteorites for the commission on meteors and meteorites of the International Astro- nomical Union for 1965.
Dr. David Tilles has made mass spectrometric studies of rare gases extracted from Pacific sea sediments and from the Greenland materials collected by Dr. Fireman and Mr. Langway. 11 From his analysis he has confirmed the anomalous argon isotope ratios (an Ar^/Ar 36 ratio below 200 compared with the atmospheric ratio of 295) of argon re- leased at high temperatures from a magnetic fraction of Pacific sediment previously reported by Dr. Craig M. Merrihue. He has also found similar argon anomalies in a separated high-density fraction of Green- land dust, demonstrating that these anomalies are a worldwide phenomenon.
Dr. Merrihue developed a new technique for studying meteorites. It consists of doing mass spectroscopy on the noble gases from neutron- irradiated samples. With this technique he obtained a number of important results: First, the chondrules in meteorites are systematically enriched in radiogenic xenon-129, and are depleted in primordial xenon. This is evidence for an early high-temperature origin. Second the matrix materials in meteorites, on the other hand, show evidence of being formed at a lower temperature in equilibrium with solar gas. Third, the variations in the xenon-129/xenon-132 ratios as a function of temperature prove that the radiogenic xenon-129 results from in situ decay of iodine-129. Fourth, since both the xenon and the xenon-129 are highest in minerals with the highest diffusion constants, there appears to be negligible xenon diffusion since the decay of iodine-129. Fifth, the chondrules show spallation-type anomalies in krypton and xenon that cannot be attributed to recent cosmic rays and may be evidence for a primordial irradiation by high-energy protons. In addition, the mass spectroscopy of noble gases from neutron -irradiated meteorite samples provides information on the abundances of iodine, bromine, selenium, and tellurium and is an interesting method for potassium-argon dating. This method for potassium-argon dating offers two important advantages over conventional methods. First, potassium and argon are simultaneously determined by a single
Dr. Merrihue also built the rare-gas extraction and sample prepara- tion system for the Observatory's mass spectrometer, thus aiding studies of rare gases from dust samples. 11 And he initiated a program for the analysis of halogens in meteorites and separate fractions of meteorites.
With James G. D' Amico, Dr. Fireman is measuring radioactivities in recently fallen chondritic meteorites, using a gamma-gamma coinci- dence spectrometer. Studying sodium-22 and aluminum-26 in par- ticular, they find evidence that there may be a slight variation in the radioactivities of these two isotopes that is related to the orbits of bodies in space.
A new iron-silicate mineral containing essential potassium was found by scientists at the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories and was analyzed by Mrs. Ursula B. Marvin. 12 The X-ray determinations showed that the mineral, which occurs in the Meso-Madaras chondrite, has the same structure as a synthetic potassium-magnesium silicate and is the first meteoritic mineral known to concentrate potassium. It was named Merrihueite.
In collaboration with scientists at the General Electric Research Laboratory in Schenectady, N.Y., Mrs. Marvin investigated meteoritic minerals by the fission-trace method. Data indicate that uranium is not dispersed in meteorites, as was formerly believed, but rather con- centrated in certain minor accessory minerals, particularly whitlockite and zircon. These can contain up to 4,000 parts per million, but uranium is essentially absent from other minerals, including both olivine and quartz. The data also reveal that many meteoritic minerals contain excess fission tracks resulting from the spontaneous decay of some element other than uranium-238. The element may be extinct plutonium-244, which contributed to the track density early in the history of the universe.
Dr. Whipple and Dr. Fireman have analyzed data on the cosmic -ray exposure ages of meteorites and have found evidence for space erosion of meteoroids. The estimated erosion rate is approximately 10~ 8 cm. per year for irons and 10~ 7 for stones.
Dr. Matthias F. Comerford has conducted preliminary laboratory experiments to determine the relative erosion rates of different meteoroid classes. His early results indicate that a simple weighting technique will provide an adequate measure of mass loss, at least for brittle ma- terials. His work is proceeding in cooperation with Dr. H. Mark at NASA's Lewis Research Center.
Dr. Comerford has also begun making microstructural studies and measurements of annealing kinetics in metals and alloys to help explain recovery and recrystallization phenomena and to identify the processes involved. Such information is fundamental to a proper interpretation of the structures observed in iron meteorites.
Dr. Paul W. Hodge and Dr. Frances W. Wright have completed surface analyses, by the electron-beam microanalyzer technique, of about 270 dust particles that probably are primarily cosmic in origin. To substantiate that probability, they are now working on similar analyses of the interiors of 23 spherules that had previously been sub- ject to surface analyses. To establish finally whether or not a volcanic origin is possible for the majority of spherules recovered in arctic ice deposits, they are continuing their investigation of volcanic spherules; results to date make a volcanic origin extremely unlikely.
Dr. Joseph Goldstein redetermined the Fe-Ni phase diagram at temperatures above 500° C. The new phase diagram can be extrap- olated to 300°G. and suggests that the a/a -\- y boundary bends back to lower Ni concentrations above 400°C. He also measured the inter diffusion coefficients for the Fe-Ni system at 1 atm. and 40 kilobar pressures. With the newly determined phase diagram and diffusion coefficients he calculated the concentration gradients in meteoritic kamacite. The results show a Ni depletion in the kama- cite near the a/y interface below 450 °C. because the kamacite cannot remain in equilibrium at low cooling temperatures and because of a number of other features of the kamacite phase. Electron-probe measurements on several metallic meteorites when compared to his predicted features of the kamacite phase agree with cooling rates of small bodies, indicating a low-pressure formation.
Basing his work on a broad range of observational data, Dr. G. Colombo has conducted a theoretical investigation of the dynamics of dust particles orbiting in the vicinity of the earth. He and his co- workers, Dr. Don Lautman and Irwin Shapiro of the M.I.T. Lincoln Laboratory, conclude that more observational data from ground, rocket, and satellite experiments are much needed.
Under the direction of Dr. Nathaniel P. Carleton and Dr. Charles H. Dugan, laboratory studies of electron impact excitation of metastable levels in atoms and molecules of atmospheric interest have been per- formed. 13 Studies were also made of the chemical reaction of certain of these metastable atoms and molecules. The atmospheric applica- tion of this work concerns the partition of energy supplied to the
To understand more fully the phenomena of comet nuclei, Dr. Charles A. Whitney, Dr. Charles A. Lundquist, and Douglas T. Pitman are continuing laboratory experiments simulating conditions on the surface of a nucleus.
Dr. Carl Sagan's laboratory for research in prebiological organic chemistry and related exobiological problems is now in operation. The basic process in the synthesis of organic compounds is the appli- cation of energy, chiefly ultraviolet radiation, to a mixture of molecules simulating features of the primitive environment of the earth or of contemporary planetary environments. Techniques of autoradio- graphic paper chromatography, thin-layer chromatography, and electrophoresis are applicable to these investigations. Some prelimi- nary results on nucleoside and nucleotide synthesis have been obtained.
Dr. Sagan, working with J. P. Phaneuf and M. Ihnat of the Avco Corporation, has compared the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared reflection spectra of the Martian bright areas with corresponding laboratory reflectivities of a variety of minerals. 14 Except at short visible wavelengths, where the effects of the Martian blue haze are prominent, pulverized limonite matches the shape and amplitude of the Martian Russell-Bond albedo within experimental and obser- vational error.
Within this department work is progressing on a variety of flight instruments. Under the supervision of Dr. Giovanni G. Fazio and Dr. Henry F. Helmken, a spark-chamber detector to search for primary gamma rays has been built and is being tested. 15 A balloon flight is scheduled for next year. Dr. Fazio and Dr. Comerford are investigating detectors to measure polarization of celestial X-ray sources.
This program, under the scientific direction of Dr. Robert J. Davis, requires the use of sophisticated television techniques and the establish- ment of an accurate absolute standard of spectrophotometric sensitivity as a function of wavelength between 1000 and 3000 angstroms. The Celescope experiment has been rescheduled for installation aboard the third Orbiting Astronomical Observatory satellite, to be launched in 1 967. Preliminary experiments may also be conducted from balloons and rockets.
Under Harvard auspices, Dr. Leo Goldberg and his group have designed and partially constructed a spectrometer-spectroheliometer which will be flown on the Orbiting Solar Observatory D satellite. 17 This instrument is an improved version of the earlier OSO-BII experi- ment, which failed early in 1965 during its first orbits. Its purpose is to investigate the structure of the sun's outer atmosphere and to study the physical processes occurring in solar flares.
Using several observational facilities, including the Kitt Peak National Observatory, Dr. Goldberg has been dealing with astrophysical im- plications of autoionization in atomic spectra. A considerable number of previously unobserved and unidentified features have been found in the solar spectrum. The profiles of the Ca I triplet near X 6350, recently identified by Mitchell and Mohler, have also been traced at various points along the solar radius and are being studied with the aid of absolute f-values measured by Mr. Gerald Newson in the Shock Tube Laboratory. 18
A project has been established under the general direction of Dr. Stephen Strom and the specific direction of David W. Latham to de- velop instrumentation for obtaining highly accurate stellar continuous spectra. A prototype photomultiplier cooling package with careful temperature control has been designed by Thomas E. Hoffman and is being constructed. A data reduction scheme has been formulated by Mr. Latham, a semiautomatic data acquisition system has been perfected, and a monochromator is being built.
The Observatory has supported the design and preliminary construc- tion of an infrared camera for Dr. Sagan's group. The camera is intended to obtain photographs of the moon and planets at several narrow-band wavelength intervals in the photographic infrared. The system is planned to be flexible for adaptation to a variety of large
Dr. Fazio and Dr. Helmken have used the large (28-ft. square) parabolic mirror system at the U.S. Army Natick Laboratories to detect air cerenkov light from cosmic -ray particles striking the atmosphere and producing charged particle showers. Significant improvements in detection ability were achieved during the year.
One major result of observational work has been the preparation of an atlas of the Large Magellanic Cloud by Dr. Hodge and Dr. Wright. The atlas includes a historical account of research on the Cloud, together with a summary of current knowledge; a complete bibliog- raphy of papers on this subject from 1925 through 1964; and 167 photographic charts on which have been identified known variable stars, star clusters, and emission nebulae. When the work is pub- lished, it should serve as a "clearing house" for information on these phenomena.
Dr. Whitney and his group working in theoretical astrophysics have developed two observational programs: 19
Dr. Sagan, Steven Kilston of Harvard College, and R. R. Drummond of the Goddard Space Flight Center undertook a search for life on Earth at km. resolution using photographs obtained by the Tiros and Nimbus meteorological satellites. Of several thousand photographs of essentially cloudless terrains taken by Nimbus I, two objects were found that were indicative of intelligent life on Earth: a jet contrail and a recently constructed interstate highway. One rectilinear feature was found on the Moroccan coast; it was not, however, due to the works of man. No signs of seasonal variation of vegetation could be found, although one rectilinear array due to the activities
From time to time a comet nucleus is observed to break into several pieces. Sometimes two or more comets are thus formed which sub- sequently follow nearly identical orbits. At other times the original comet simply vanishes, leaving only the suspicion that its nucleus fragmented. Dr. Whipple and Robert P. Stefanik have been conduct-
Research in cosmology and general relativity proceeded along several paths. Dr. James P. Wright and Dr. Sachiko Tsuruta evaluated the pulsation periods of relativistic objects, paying particular attention to neutron stars where the whole star may pulsate in 0.001 second. The stability of superdense stars was studied using conventional trial functions corresponding to homologous oscillation, and further work indicates the need to use more elaborate trial functions. Dr. Wright also investigated the role of rotation in a particular relativistic model of the universe.
Dr. Tsuruta evaluated the neutrino energy loss from stars through the so-called URGA (uniform rapid contraction) process for ordinary and dense matter in the temperature range T = 10 9 °K to T = 5 X 10 9 °K and of the density range p = 10 6 grams-cm. 3 to 3 X 10 u grams- cm. 3 . This energy loss rate is highly sensitive to temperature, and above a temperature of 2 to 3 X 10 9 °K the nuclear URGA process
Dr. Henri E. Mitler has made considerable progress in his study of neutron activation of nuclei in meteoroids from solar and galactic cosmic rays. He has found a relatively simple analytical method for obtaining the total number of neutrons, protons, and heavier particles evaporated from excited nuclei and has obtained an improved neutron production spectrum. He has also solved the problem of spallation production of nuclei in spherical meteoroids by cosmic rays and will apply this as a test of the space erosion theory by Dr. Whipple and Dr. Fireman.
Dr. William M. Irvine completed a study of local irregularities in cosmological models according to general relativity. Conditions were derived for the validity of Newtonian gravitational theory on a local scale in such a universe, and it was shown that such models satisfy Mach's principle. The energy of the irregularities in such a universe is not conserved, a fact of significance to cosmogony.
Research in stellar atmospheres, under the general supervision of Dr. Whitney, now comprises perhaps the strongest theoretical program of its kind in the world. 19 To supplement this theoretical work, the observational program previously mentioned was initiated this year. An event of particular note was the second Harvard-Smithsonian con- ference on stellar atmospheres, held at the Observatories in January. 20 This meeting was organized by Dr. Whitney, Dr. Eugene H. Avrett, and Dr. Owen J. Gingerich; the proceedings, published as Special Report No. 174, contained over 450 pages summarizing 3 days' dis- cussion of problems of the formation of spectrum lines. This conference series has clearly been adopted as an "Institution" by the astronomical community.
Dr. Avrett has made considerable progress in the calculation of strong absorption at emission lines formed in the outermost layers of stellar atmospheres and has completed an investigation of "source function equality" in multiplet lines. This study is part of a larger project involving radiative transfer calculations of spectra from complex atoms with applications to solar chromospheric lines. In collaboration with Dr. Robert W. Noyes, he is making a detailed analysis of the solar H and K lines of ionized calcium and of magnesium.
The group devoted a major effort toward examining the validity of model atmosphere techniques and extending these theories and tech- niques to a practical analysis of the spectra of "real" stars. Dr. Wolf- gang Kalkofen continued his investigations of the influence of departures from local thermodynamic equilibrium on the structure of model atmospheres. 21 This theoretical work, done in collaboration with Dr. Avrett, promises to have an important bearing on the quantitative analysis of stellar spectra, as evidenced by recent work of Dr. Strom and Dr. Gingerich.
Dr. Strom and Dr. Gingerich have nearly completed an analysis of the spectra of Sirius and Vega, two bright stars whose surface tempera- tures are about 10,000°K. This will be the most thorough study ever performed for any star other than the sun. Two principal results have emerged from this study. In the first place, it is quite clear that Sirius has a metal content similar to that of metallic-line A stars and much higher than that of Vega. Second, there were significant discrepancies in the results in the analyses which were removed when the departures from local thermodynamic equilibrium for the second and third levels of neutral hydrogen were explicitly included. The magnitude of this effect will be appreciated when it is noted that the new models alter the estimates of surface temperature for these stars by about 1,000°K, and may indicate that there will be a significant revision of the stellar temperature scale. 19
Dr. Whitney's theoretical work was aimed at providing insight into dynamical properties of stellar atmospheres and the general problem of gas dynamic flow in the presence of radiative transfer.
Dr. Noyes continued his theoretical and observational studies of the solar atmosphere. He and Dr. Whitney organized an informal symposium on "motions in the solar atmosphere" to which a small number of specialists throughout the country were invited.
Dr. George B. Rybicki derived radiative transfer equations for a medium with small stochastically defined opacity and energy fluctua- tions. The theory is shown to provide a description of the solar atmosphere which has statistically defined inhomogeneities due to an underlying convection zone. An unexpected result is that long-range correlations in the emergent intensity may appear that are not directly related to the correlation scales in the energy fluctuations. Rather, they are related to the depth of the zone in which the energy fluctua- tions occur, even if this is large in comparison with a radiation mean- free path.
Dr. Irvine pursued his fundamental studies of scattering phenomena in planetary atmospheres. He developed a new approach to the study of the formation of absorption bands in a scattering atmosphere through equations for the probability distribution of photon-optical paths. Also, radiative transfer in layers of large particles (dust or clouds) was invesitgated with an explicit evaluation of the influence of the large forward lobe in the scattering pattern. Dr. Irvine com- puted the cross sections for extinction, scattering, and radiation pressure for both dielectric and absorbing particles and included the contribu- tion of surface waves to the scattering. As an aid to the study of planetary cloud and dust layers, he evaluated the albedo and asym- metry factor of water droplets and sand spheres. 22
Analyzing recent passive and active radio observations of Mars, Dr. Sagan and Dr. James B. Pollack have found a significant correlation of radar reflectivity enhancements with the Martian dark areas Cerberus- Trivium Gharontis, Nepenthes, and Syrtis Major.
Dr. Hawkins has developed a computer program in astroarcheology that determines the position on the celestial sphere that is marked by a chosen line on the ground. The stones, stone holes, and archways at Stonehenge in England revealed a surprising fit with the extreme positions of sunrise, sunset, moonrise, and moonset. Also, the circle of 56 holes is exactly the number required to predict the swing of the moon and the occurrence of eclipse seasons. This observatory-com- puter is a remarkable achievement for circa 2000 B.C. Similar align- ments and computer possibilities were found from the stone rows and rings at Callanish, on the Isle of Lewis, Scotland. The program has been made available to other scientists, and already investigations using it have been made in Illinois, in Mexico, and elsewhere.
Dr. Gingerich has undertaken an extensive study of Kepler's Astronomia Nova that should ultimately result in the first English translation of and commentary on this classic treatise. This work is an outgrowth of a previous computer study that indicated Kepler's work on the orbit of Mars was greatly impeded by his frequent nu- merical errors. Dr. Gingerich has also been examining, with the aid of a computer, Kepler's Rudolphine Tables of 1627 to determine the internal consistency of the calculations and their accuracy for pre- dicting planetary positions. 23
Recognizing the Observatory's active and productive program in geodesy, the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics invited the Observatory to establish a Central Bureau of Satellite Geodesy. The Bureau is now in operation, with Dr. Whipple as director and Jan RolfF as executive director. 24
On January 1 , the Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams was transferred to the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory from the Copenhagen Observatory, where it had operated since 1922. The Bureau's responsibilities include the rapid dissemination of astronomical information both by telegraph and by printed circulars, as well as the nomenclature of comets. Under the direction of Dr. Gingerich, the Bureau had issued 30 circulars by the end of the year. 25
The Observatory staff was increased during the year by physicists Dr. Wolfgang Kalkofen, Dr. Anthony Lee, Dr. James Pollack, Dr. George Rybicki, Dr. Sachiko Tsuruta, Dr. Franco Verniani, and Dr. James Wright; astrophysicist Dr. Max Roemer; geodesist Dr. William Strange; and mathematician Dr. Manfred Friedman. John Burke joined the staff as flight operations manager, William Hirst as chief of Moon watch, Thomas Hoffman as staff engineer, John Hsia as chief of station operations, and Raymond Watts, Jr., as chief of editorial and publications.
The computations, data, and photoreduction divisions became the data processing department under Dr. Richard Haefner. Edward Gaposchkin and Leonard Solomon joined research and analysis, and Jerome Cherniack became chief of computations and Robert Martin chief of data. E. Nelson Hayes became editor-in-chief. Jan Rolff was appointed executive director of the Central Bureau for Satellite Geodesy.
Consultants to the Observatory during the year were Dr. G. de Vaucouleurs, Dr. William Kaula, Dr. Colin Keay, Daniel Malaise, Dr. Shambhu Sinvhal, Dr. George Veis, Dr. John Wood, and Costas Papaliolios.
Metallurgist Dr. Joseph Goldstein transferred to Goddard Space Flight Center. Physicist Jack Tech transferred from and returned to the National Bureau of Standards during the year. Moonwatch chief Richard Vanderburgh and physicists Dr. Morton Davies and Dr. William Elford resigned.
Dr. Craig M. Merrihue, physicist, and associate of Harvard University, died in a mountain-climbing accident March 14, 1965. Born in Schenectady, N.Y., July 8, 1933, he was awarded the B.A. degree from Harvard University in 1956 and the Ph.D. from the University of California at Berkeley in 1964. He lived in Cambridge with his wife Sandra and their son Jeffrey. In his short career, he demonstrated an unusual combination of theoretical skills and ex- perimental aptitude and made important contributions to science, particularly in the analysis of radioisotopes in meterorites. He was a quiet, modest, unassuming man with intense enthusiasm for life. He was deeply involved in the public problems of his time, taking an active interest in conservation, civil liberties, and political issues. He was concerned alike for the individual and for society. A skillful mountain climber, he had led an expedition to the Andes, had climbed
A number of these projects are already bearing fruit. Probably the Collection's outstanding achievement of the year in support of American art was the organization and presentation of the Stuart Davis Memorial Exhibition, together with a catalog. This extensive exhibit (opened by Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson) was most effectively presented in the re- modeled Art Hall. It may be said to reflect the high standards of presentation and scholarship of the NCFA and also the determination of the National Collection to present the great achievements of American art to the nation and the world.
Recommendations were made for the reappointment of Edgar P. Richardson, Charles Sawyer, and David E. Finley for the usual 4-year period. Dr. Richardson was elected chairman of the Commission replacing Paul Manship, who had served as chairman for many years and who had requested that he not be reelected.
Mr. Ripley commented on the National Collection of Fine Arts and the appointment of Dr. Scott as the Collection's new director. He said that the current atmosphere in Washington appears to be suitable for the enhancement of the National Collection and that we can look for- ward with hope and great enthusiasm.
Mr. Bradley remarked on current status of plans on remodeling of the Old Patent Office Building. He said that construction had already begun and that completion was expected in about 22 months' time.
Events of the past year and for the future were briefly outlined by Dr. Scott and commented upon by members of the Commission.
The Collection was increased by 1,243 new acquisitions from 27 donors during the year. These include 209 paintings and drawings, 7 pieces of sculpture, 1,025 graphics, and 2 decorative art objects. Significant among these accessions are a pair of portraits attributed to Jacob Eicholtz (1776-1842), Jane Evans Tevis and Joshua Tevis, given by the Misses Emily and Nanny Chase; two early 19th-century portraits of Margaret Schley Goldsborough and Edward Terbury Goldsborough by an undetermined artist, given by Miss Mary L. Schaff; a painting, Farmyard in the Snow, by the Ash-Can School painter James Preston (1873-1962), given by Mrs. Chester Browne; two murals by Ezra Winter (1886-1949), the gift of Mrs. Winter; representative examples of the work of Frank C. Kirk (1889-1963), given by Mrs. Kirk; a mural by Griffith Baily Coale (1890-1950), given by the United States [Line; two other works by Coale, gifts of the artist's widow; a study of an unexecuted equestrian monument, Work Horse, given by the artist Anna Hyatt Huntington (born in 1876); a large abstract painting by Charles Green Shaw (born 1892), given by the artist; 1,000 19th-century engravings, the gift of Joseph V. Reed; and a
During the year 10 paintings were restored by Harold F. Cross, 2 by Ben B. Johnson, 1 by H. Stewart Treviranus, and 1 by Janice W. Hines. In addition, Mr. Cross examined paintings in the collections for condition, so as to establish a priority program for restoration preliminary to reinstallation in the Old Patent Office Building. Sixteen paintings by Albert Pinkham Ryder were examined by Sheldon Keck in anticipation of a special restoration project on these works.
NGFA coordinated the exhibition's tour to the Art Institute of Chicago, the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York, and the Art Galleries of the University of California at Los Angeles. The exhibit was opened by Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, and dis- tinguished guests included Mrs. Stuart Davis, her son Earl, and Mrs. Edith Halpert.
The director and Mrs. Breeskin served as art advisers for the first White House Festival of the Arts held on June 14, 1965. The Festival was concerned with both the visual and performing arts and presented the best of our art today. The paintings selected ranged from the realism of Andrew Wyeth to the "op art" of Richard
The State Department's Art-in-Embassies program, under the direction of Mrs. Nancy Kefauver, has been assisted by the National Collection of Fine Arts. The program's purpose is to bring American art to our embassies and in turn to improve our cultural image abroad. The National Collection now serves as a repository and clearinghouse for the Project's collection of paintings, prints, sculpture, and other objects prior to sending these works abroad. Dr. Scott also serves as a member of the Executive Committee for this important program.
Mrs. Adelyn D. Breeskin, special consultant for Fine Arts, was a member of the jury for the Carnegie International Exhibition, Pitts- burgh, Pa.; a member of the Board for the Print Council of America; lectured as an American Specialist throughout the Orient for the Department of State; and lectured at the Newark Museum on "The Rise of Women Artists."
The year 1964-1965 was one of great changes for the Traveling Exhibition Service. Mrs. Dorothy Van Arsdale assumed the position of chief, Mrs. Nancy Padnos, assistant chief; Miss Barboura Flues became registrar and then exhibits coordinator, and Mrs. Louis Rose became registrar. Additions to the staff during the year are Mrs. Michael Taylor, exhibits coordinator; Mrs. Sarah McGurgan, typist; Herbert Hodge, clerk; Mrs. Sadie Curtin, accounting technician.
In November 1964, Mrs. Van Arsdale visited three museums in San Francisco, one in Portland, Oreg., two in Seattle, one in Denver, one in Omaha, and one in Minneapolis. Mrs. Van Arsdale, Mrs. Padnos, and staff members also visited museums and collections along the eastern seaboard.
Mrs. Padnos left for Europe the early part of June to visit museums and galleries in England, France, Italy, Switzerland, and Germany.
Embassy. Watercolors by Pop Hart . . . Miss Jeanne O. Hart, Kew Gardens, N.Y. Pueblo Indian Paintings .... Riverside Museum, New York City. Modern Watercolors from Swedish Institute, Stockholm; Swedish
Thirteen Chinese and Japanese paintings and screens were restored, repaired, or remounted by Mr. Sugiura, Oriental picture mounter, who also made a large number of rubbings of Chinese bronzes and sculptures. F. A. Haentschke, illustrator, remounted 91 Persian and Indian paintings. Ben Johnson, professional painting restorer, worked for some months at the Gallery, cleaning, repairing, and otherwise restoring 21 American paintings.
Mr. Sugiura has also been working on a group of 11 Chinese and Japanese paintings and screens belonging to the Philadelphia Museum of Art, 6 of which have been completed; this work is being done in exchange for a Chinese bronze ting which has been incorporated into the Study Collection. In addition, he has completely cleaned, re- paired, and retouched three Far Eastern screens belonging to the Department of State.
November 70. Dr. George C. Miles, of the American Numismatic Society, New York: "Unknotting the Knotted Column in Byzantine Architecture"; attendance, 125. 7965
Mrs. Elisabeth W. FitzHugh, assistant in technical research since 1956, resigned in December. This position has been temporarily filled by student-intern William T. Chase of the Conservation Center, Insti- tute of Fine Arts, New York University.
Dr. Ettinghausen, at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston: "Dionysiac Scenes in Sasanian Art"; attendance, 121.
Mr. R. C. Mielke completed a trip through the Mid- western States, where he saw the building installations in the Dayton Art Institute, Cincinnati Art Museum, John Herron Art Institute (Indianapolis), City Art Museum of St. Louis, William Rockhill Nelson Gallery of Art (Kansas City, Mo.), Art Institute of Chicago, Detroit Institute of Arts, Toledo Museum of Art, and Cleveland Museum of Art.
Dr. Pope, in Europe, visited numerous museums and saw private collections in Geneva and Basel, Switzer- land; Paris, France; and in and near London, England.
Dr. Stern, in Philadelphia, examined numerous objects at the Philadelphia Museum of Art and one private collection.
Dr. Stern, in New York, attended the Exhibition of Nepalese Art at Asia House, and examined Far Eastern objects at a dealer.
Mr. Trousdale, in the Near East, participated in the University of Michigan's archeological excavation at Qasr al-Hayr al-Sharqi, Syria; visited archeological sites and architectural monuments, and examined museum and private collections in Istanbul and Ankara, Turkey; in Damascus, Syria; in Tehran, Qum, Isfahan, Arbaquh, Yazd, Kirman, Bam, the Sistan area, Kishmar, Mashhad, and Robat Sharaf, Iran; and in Cairo and Alexandria, Egypt.
Dr. Cahill, in Ann Arbor, Mich., attended a special committee meeting to plan for the Palace Museum Photographic Archive.
Dr. Pope, in New York, examined numerous Far Eastern objects at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and at several dealers.
Dr. Pope, in Los Angeles, attended meetings of the College Art Association, including a meeting of the Board; and examined Chinese and Japanese objects at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. In San Francisco, he examined Chinese paintings and bronzes for the U.S. Collector of Customs; and at the M. H. de Young Memorial Museum, numerous Chinese blue- and-white porcelains in the Roy Leventritt Collection and Chinese bronzes in the Avery Brundage Collection.
Dr. Ettinghausen, in Hudson, N.Y., examined objects in a private collection; and in New York, visited the Institute of Fine Arts, New York University.
Dr. Pope, in New York, attended meetings of the joint ACLS/SSRC Committee on Grants for Research on Asia; attended a.n exhibition of Indian sculpture at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; and examined objects at several dealers.
Dr. Cahill, in Providence, R.I., attended the exhibition of Oriental Arts at the Rhode Island School of Design Museum; in New York, attended a meeting at New York University to plan a summer seminar in Chinese Art; and visited the "Relics of Ancient China in the Singer Collection" at Asia House and the exhibition of Indian sculpture at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; examined objects at several dealers; in Princeton, N.J., attended a meeting of the Chinese Art Subcom- mittee of the Committee on the Study of Chinese Civilization at Princeton University; and examined objects in private collections and at several dealers.
Dr. Stern, in Minneapolis and Mound, Minn., examined numerous objects at the Minneapolis Institute of Arts, and in a private collection.
Dr. Pope, in Oxford and London, England, examined Far Eastern objects in several museums and private collections.
Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, met with Miss Marjorie Kevorkian of the Kevorkian Foundation; and ex- amined objects at several dealers.
Dr. Stern, in Philadelphia, attended meetings of the Catalog Committee for the forthcoming Japanese Exhibition; in New York, attended a committee meeting of the Archives of American Art, and one for
Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, examined objects for a dealer; and in Ann Arbor, Mich., examined objects at the Art Museum, University of Michigan.
Dr. Pope, in Chicago, attended a meeting of the Ameri- can Oriental Society, and examined objects at the Art Institute and at a dealer; in Denver, Colo., examined objects in the office of the U.S. Attorney.
Mr. Gettens, at Harbor Island, Kure Beach, N.C., did research at the Sea Horse Institute (International Nickel Company); in Richmond, Va., visited the W.J. Barrow Research Laboratory for Paper at the Virginia Historical Society, and at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts examined Chinese bronze ceremonial vessels.
Dr. Cahill, in Cambridge and Boston, attended a con- ference on projects for the Committee on Studies of Chinese Civilization; and examined objects at the Fogg Art Museum and the Museum of Fine Arts, including the Hobart Collection.
Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, assisted in giving a doctoral examination at Columbia University; and examined objects in private collections and at dealers.
Dr. Cahill, in Kansas City, examined Chinese paintings in the William Rockhill Nelson Gallery of Art, in- cluding the Nti Wa Chai Collection.
Dr. Cahill, in New York, attended a meeting of the Committee on Studies of Chinese Civilization; visited the exhibition of Far Eastern art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; and examined objects in a private collection and at several dealers.
Mrs. West and Mrs. Quail, in New York, attended meetings of the Museum Sales Association, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Museum of the City of New York, and the Museum of Modern Art.
Dr. Pope, in New York, attended a meeting of the Advisory Council of Asia House Gallery, and examined objects at several dealers; at Winterthur, Del., attended meetings of the Association of Art Museum Directors.
Advisory Council, Asia House Gallery; and examined objects in a private collection and at several dealers. Dr. Ettinghausen, in New York, attended a meeting of the Advisory Council, Asia House Gallery; and examined objects at a dealer.
Dr. Pope: Research Professor of Oriental Art, Department of the History of Art, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Chairman, Editorial Board of Ars Orientalis, University of Michigan. Chair- man, Louise Wallace Hackney Scholarship Committee, American Oriental Society. Member, Board of Management, Cosmos Club, Washington, D.C. Member, Board of Directors, College Art Association. Member, Association of Art Museum Directors. Member, Board of Advisors of the Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection. Chairman, ACLS/SSRG Joint Com- mittee for Grants for Research on Asia. Member, Advisory Committee, Asia House Gallery, New York, N.Y.
Dr. Stern: Member, Art Committee, Cosmos Club, Washington, D.C. Advisor, City of San Francisco, for selection, artistic appraisal, and cataloging of Japanese and Korean objects in the Avery Brundage Collection. Member, ad hoc Committee for a planning program for the conservation of Far Eastern artistic and historic works, Freer Gallery of Art and New York University. Member, International Editorial Advisory Board, Japanese Ukiyoe Society, Tokyo, Japan. Member, Research Committee, Smithsonian Institution. Chairman, Program Com-
Dr. Ettinghausen: Honorary member, German Archaeological In- stitute, Berlin, Germany. Trustee, American Research Center in Egypt, New York. Adjunct Professor of Fine Arts, Institute of Fine Arts, New York University. Research Professor of Islamic Art, University of Michigan. Member of Executive Committee, Trustee, and Chairman of the Accessions Committee, Textile Museum of the District of Columbia. Member, Editorial Board, Art Bulletin, College Art Association of America, New York. Member, Consultative Committee, Ars Orientalis, Uni- versity of Michigan. Governor, Washington Society of the Archaeological Institute of America, Washington, D.C. Mem- ber, National Committee, Iran Foundation, Inc., for the Ad- vancement of Health and Education in Iran, N.Y. Member, Board of Directors, American Iqbal Society, Washington, D.C. Member, Board of Governors, Middle East Institute, Washington, D.C. Member, Editorial Board, Kairos, Salzburg, Germany. Foreign Member, Society of Iranian National Monuments, Teheran, Iran. Member, Administrative Committee of the International Society for Oriental Research, Istanbul, Turkey, and Frankfurt, Germany. Member, Board of Directors, Iran- America Society, Washington, D.C. Associate Member, Institut d'Egypte, Cairo, Egypt. Member, Advisory Committee, Asia House Gallery, New York. Member, Advisory Board, Fairfax County Cultural Association, Inc.
Dr. Cahill: Adjunct Professor, Oriental Art, American University, Washington. Trustee, Japan-America Society, Washington. Member, Board of Directors, Sino-American Cultural Society, Washington. Member, Advisory Council, Asia House Gallery, New York. Chairman, Subcommittee on Chinese Art, Com- mittee on Studies of Chinese Civilization, American Council of Learned Societies.
Mr. Trousdale: Member, Oriental Languages Honor Society, University of California, Berkeley. Member, American Oriental Society. Member, Archaeological Institute of America. Mem- ber, Iran-America Society.
Mr. Gettens: Section Editor, I-History, Education and Documen- tation, Chemical Abstracts. Member, Board of Consulting Fellows, Conservation Center, Institute of Fine Arts, New York Univer- sity. Assistant Editor, IIC Abstracts: Abstracts of the Technical
Mrs. FitzHugh: Editor, IIC Abstracts: Abstracts of the Technical Literature of Archaeology and the Fine Arts, London, England. Member, Board of Governors and Assistant Secretary, Washington Society of the Archaeological Institute of America.
Mr. Sugiura: Member, ad hoc Committee for planning program for conservation of Far Eastern artistic and historic works, Freer Gallery of Art and New York University. Member, Kokuho Shuri Soken, Senmei Kai (Japan) .
Mrs. Blanche A. Shuler resigned as secretary-sten- ographer and reported for duty as library assistant on October 12.
The statutory members of the Board of Trustees of the National Gallery of Art are the Chief Justice of the United States, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, ex officio. On May 6, 1965, Paul Mellon was reelected a general trustee of the National Gallery of Art to serve in that capacity for the term expiring July 1, 1975. The four other general trustees continuing in office during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1965, were John Hay Whitney, John N. Irwin II, Dr. Franklin D. Murphy, and Lessing J. Rosenwald. On May 6, 1965, Paul Mellon was reelected by the Board of Trustees to serve as president of the Gallery, and John Hay Whitney was reelected vice president.
In the fiscal year 1965 gifts of money were made by the Charles Ulrick and Josephine Bay Foundation, Avalon Foundation, Samuel H. Kress Foundation, Old Dominion Foundation, Mrs. Cordelia S. May, Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, J. I. Foundation, Inc., Mr. Edwin Binney III and the Lila Acheson Wallace Fund.
Mrs. Mellon Bruce contributed additional funds for the purchase of works of art for the National Gallery of Art and for educational purposes related to works of art.
Exhibitions of recent accessions: Tiberius and Agrippina by Rubens, November 29, 1964, through December 20, 1964; A Knight of the Golden Fleece, French School, XV Century, December 22, 1964, through February 5, 1965; Portrait of a Man in a Fur-lined Coat by Rembrandt, lent by The Fuller Foundation, from January 8, 1965; The Cornell Farm by Edward Hicks, Captain Samuel Chandler and Mrs. Samuel Chandler by Winthrop Chandler, February 6, 1965 through February 14, 1965; Watson and the Shark by Copley, February 21,
The senior fellow of the National Gallery of Art Research Project at the Mellon Institute in Pittsburgh, Pa., Dr. Robert L. Feller, published several articles related to the important scientific research which he has been conducting. They are Control of the Deteriorating Effects of Light on Museum Objects in Museum, September 1964 issue; What's in a Name: Dammar in The Crucible, October 1964 issue; The Use of an Electrically-Conducting Glass Panel as a Heating Surface (with Jeanne L. Kostich) in Bulletin American Group — IIC, October 1964 issue; and Critical Pigment Volume Concentration and Chalking in Paints (with J. J. Matous) in Bulletin American Group — IIC, October 1964 issue.
The project undertaken two years ago in connection with the "Widen- ing Horizons" program, designed by various Government agencies to introduce high school students to career opportunities offered in Wash- ington, was continued. Mr. Stites gave six briefing lectures and six tours to the volunteers conducting this program. These tours and lectures were attended by 1,570 persons — an increase of 755 over the previous year.
Mr. Evans prepared texts for new slide lectures and traveling ex- hibitions, made recordings of the texts for three slide lectures, and supervised the translation into French and recording of a lecture that will be circulated for the use of French language teachers. Five new subjects were added to the slide lectures and seven new subjects to the traveling exhibitions. Mr. Evans attended conferences to
The National Gallery of Art strings, conducted by Mr. Bales, fur- nished music during four of the Gallery's openings. The orchestra program on October 25, 1964, was played in honor of United Nations
Day, and the concert on January 17 featured Mr. Bales's "The Repub- lic" and was played in honor of the inauguration of the President and Vice President of the United States.
Seven Sunday evenings, April 25 through June 6, were devoted to the Gallery's 22d American Music Festival. All concerts were broadcast in their entirety by WGMS-AM and FM. Washington music critics continued their regular coverage of the concerts. During the inter- mission periods of the Sunday evening broadcasts, members of the educational staff spoke on art matters, and Mr. Bales discussed the musical programs. Mr. Bales appeared as guest conductor at various places throughout the country and taught a class in composition. The Gallery orchestra played a number of concerts at schools and churches in nearby towns and cities.
Two hour-long television programs of the National Gallery of Art orchestra with Mr. Bales conducting were taped by WTOP-TV, and these, together with two previous programs which were repeated, were telecast during the winter and spring.
Mr. Bales completed and performed two new works, one of which was commissioned by the Kindler Foundation of Washington. He also participated in the Civil War Centennial celebration and received an award for the National Gallery of Art. The Gallery orchestra and Mr. Bales also received a certificate of award from the American Association of University Women for an outstanding cultural and educational contribution to the community through the television programs. This is the third year that the Gallery has been so honored.
During the 1965 inaugural ceremonies, the Trustees were pleased to make the Gallery available for the Reception of Distinguished Ladies on January 18, 1965. Over 6,500 invited guests were received in the two Garden Courts and viewed the collections. Both the First Lady, Mrs. Johnson, and the wife of the Vice President, Mrs. Humphrey, assisted in the receiving lines.
Dr. Austin Stanley Rand, a herpetologist, was added to the staff last year, bringing the total of senior staff scientists to four.
Dr. Robert L. Dressier continued his studies of orchids and orchid pollination, supported by the National Science Foundation. In con- nection with this project, he made brief trips to Brazil, Peru, several U.S. museums, and a longer trip to Costa Rica.
Dr. Neal G. Smith continued his field studies on the evolution and genetics of egg-mimicry in parasitic cuckoos, the behavior of oropen- dolas, and initiated an experimental study of avian species diversity in tropical grasslands. He visited museums in Washington, New York, Ithaca, and Boston.
Dr. Rand attended the Lizard Ecology Symposium in Kansas City, Mo., and the meeting of the American Association of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists in Lawrence, Kan. He also visited the Chicago Natural History Museum, Harvard University, and the University of Pennsylvania for consultation on his continuing research on the evolu- tion of the West Indian Anoles, and on concepts and techniques of bioacoustics.
Dr. Martin H. Moynihan continued research on the communication systems and social behavior of New World primates and various groups of passerine birds. A study of geographic variation in social behavior among Andean birds is being supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation. In connection with this work, Dr. Moynihan made several field trips to Colombia and Venezuela, and visited laboratories in London, Oxford, Cambridge, Paris, and New Orleans. He also delivered a paper in the symposium on social interactions among primates at the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Montreal.
The following institutions continued their support of the laboratory through the payment of table subscriptions: Eastman Kodak Co., New York Zoological Society, and the Smithsonian Institution. Donations also are gratefully acknowledged from Dr. Eugene Eisen- mann, G. M. Goethe, and E. F. Morris.
It is anticipated that limited facilities on both sides of the isthmus will soon be available for marine research. Dr. Ira Rubinoff, a marine biologist, will join the staff next year.
The Canal Zone Biological Area can operate only with the excellent cooperation of the Canal Zone Government and the Panama Canal Company. Thanks are due especially to the Customs and Immigration officials; the Police Division; the Division of Sanitation; and the Elec- tronics Section of the Electrical Division. Also deeply appreciated are the advice and assistance provided by the Gorgas Memorial Lab- oratory, the Inter-American Geodetic Survey, the Division of Veteri- nary Medicine, Dr. W. John Smith of Harvard University, and R. A. Botzenmayer, chief engineer, Southern Command Network.
Dr. Neal Smith, staff zoologist, examining eggs of parasitic cuckoos in the main laboratory building, Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone.
Vocalization of frogs being recorded by Dr. Stanley Rand, staff zoologist, outside the main animal house, Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone.
First, to alleviate the "space vacuum," an astronautics department under the direction of Frederick C. Durant III was established. Mr. Durant came into the museum in October 1964 as one of the members of the planning group. He joined the staff as assistant director of astronautics in January 1965. His long background and broad expe- rience in rocketry and space technology have greatly strengthened NAM's position. Under his direction a curatorial staff specializing in space vehicle design, launch and propulsion technology, auxiliary sys- tems development, and life support techniques will be developed.
Second, close working relationships were established with NASA, not only through the activities of NASA's Artifacts Committee (which deals primarily with the disposition of important NASA- developed hardware) but also with the scientific and technical staffs of NASA. Administrator James Webb, Dr. Hugh Dryden, Dr. Robert Seamans, and their associates supplied strong and continuing support to NAM's plans and programs. In turn, NAM provided public exhibition space for NASA displays of current interest. Concurrently with the completion of such programs as the Gemini flights, the Ranger Moon shots, and the Mariner Mars exploration, the associated
As soon as conditions permit, an assistant director of aeronautics (as an "opposite number" for Mr. Durant) will be selected. During the year the work of the department was ably forwarded by the present curatorial staff: Louis Casey for aircraft, Robert Meyer for power plants and propulsion, and Kenneth Newland for auxiliary systems and devices.
The information and education department, headed by chief historian Paul E. Garber, maintained a constant service to correspond- ents and visitors in connection with their studies on flight and flight technology. Steps were initiated to improve the sorting and cataloging of the Museum's collection of research material. The services pro- vided by Mr. Garber and his assistants contributed greatly to the preparation of many articles for publication, television, and other programs. Among his many activities, Mr. Garber gave 47 formal lectures on various aspects of the history of flight, conducted 14 lecture tours to museums, and participated in 6 radio and television programs.
Electro Optical Systems, Inc., Pasadena, Calif.: Ion Thruster, marked with label reading "in part developed by Dr. A. T. For- rester, Electro Optical Systems, Inc." This specimen is operational duplicate of Thruster used in suborbital shot (NAM 1545).
Goddard, Mrs. Robert H., Worcester, Mass.: Equipment used to test the flash visibility range of several mixtures of metal powders (NAM 1552). Suitcase used by Dr. Robert H. Goddard (NAM 1551). Glassware used by/or under the supervision of Dr. Goddard in experimental investigations of the behavior of ions (NAM 1550).
Patterson, Mr. & Mrs. Jefferson, Washington, D.C.: Military uniform belonging to 1st Lt. Frank Stuart Patterson (1918) in whose honor Patterson Field (later Wright- Patterson AFB, Dayton, Ohio) was named (NAM 1499).
Schoenberg, Mr., Long Island, N.Y.: 1:4 size model of a New Standard D-25A "Pride of Patterson" and a Curtiss-Reed propel- ler, circa 1925 (NAM 1489).
Conn. Kines, Ronald L., Hyattsville, Md. Knell, K. A., Cambridge, England. Koster, William C, Evanston, 111. Kulp, Mrs. Jeanne, Reisterstown,
Richard Adler* Howard F. Ahmanson Floyd D. Akers Robert O. Anderson + * Ralph E. Becker + K. LeMoyne Billings + Mrs. Thomas W. Braden* Ernest R. Breech Edgar M. Bronfman Mrs. George R. Brown* Ralph J. Bunche Anthony J. Celebrezze Joseph S. Clark Abe Fortas* J. William Fulbright Mrs. George A. Garrett Leonard H. Goldenson* George B. Hartzog, Jr. + Mrs. John F. Kennedy -f- Robert F. Kennedy +* Francis Keppel Mrs. Albert D. Lasker + Erich Leinsdorf+*
Sol M. Linowilz+* Harry C. McPherson, Jr.+* George Meany L. Quincy Mumford Edwin W. Pauley* Arthur Penn* Mrs. Charlotte T. Reid Richard S. Reynolds, Jr. Frank H. Ricketson, Jr. S. Dillon Ripley, 11 + Richard Rodgers* Leverett Saltonstall Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.* Mrs. Jouett Shouse-f- Mrs. Jean Kennedy Smith* Roger L. Stevens + Frank Thompson, Jr. Walter N. Tobriner + William Walton + William H. Waters, Jr. Edwin L. Weisl, Sr.* Robert W. Woodruff* James C. Wright, Jr.
Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, Mrs. John F. Kennedy and Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower continue to serve as honorary cochairmen of the Center
In addition to Mr. Stevens, chairman ex officio, trustees and offi- cers of the Center serving on the committee are :
Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., was appointed chairman of the Center's Program Committee. Serving with him will be Mrs. Thomas W. Braden, Harold Clurman, Richard N. Goodwin, August Heckscher, Mrs. John F. Kennedy, Senator Robert F. Kennedy, Goddard Lieberson, Oliver Smith, and George Stevens, Jr. The Program Committee will make recommendations for the maximum effective use of the Center's facilities to comply with the law and the intent of the Congress and will also suggest candidates for the position of program director as well as guidelines respecting the duties of this office. The Board of Trustees in turn will act on these recommen- dations and define the policy with respect to the Center's operations.
The Fine Arts Accessions Committee appointed a subcommittee to assist it in preliminary consideration and screening of all works of art offered to the Center. The subcommittee is made up of leading authorities in the fine arts residing in the Washington area. Serving on the subcommittee are: David W. Scott, National Collection of Fine Arts, as chairman; J. Carter Brown, National Gallery of Art; Mrs. Marjorie Phillips, The Phillips Gallery; Edward Durell Stone; Hermann W. Williams, Jr., Corcoran Gallery of Art; and Karel Yasko, General Services Administration. The list of gifts tendered and offi- cially accepted thus far (not including those from foreign governments) comprise the following items:
The two daughters and the son of the late Mr. and Mrs. Christian Heurich, Sr., deeded to the Center, as a gift, a plot of land appraised at $150,000. It is situated within the boundaries of the Center's site. This gift, which was made in memory of Mr. and Mrs. Heurich, Sr., completed the acquisition of their property without the necessity for any condemnation action by the National Capital Planning Commission.
The Concert Hall now is in a rectangular form in the interest of better acoustics. Provision also has been made for the installation of an Aeolian-Skinner concert organ which was given to the Center by Mrs. Jouett Shouse. It has been designed for use either as a solo instrument or as part of an orchestra.
Finally, it cannot be stressed too greatly that the development of the Center to the stage herein described would not have been possible without the unceasing support and encouragement that has been received from the Smithsonian Institution, the General Services Admin- istration, the many other Government agencies who have been at all times helpful and understanding, the members of Congress whose faith and trust in our undertaking have eased many burdens and problems, all of the members of President Kennedy's family whose active interest has been a constant source of inspiration, and the enthusiasm and support of President and Mrs. Johnson.
In addition, John Frazer is pursuing a research project under con- tract in the Frick Art Reference Library, and Mr. Proetz is under similar contract for architectural studies of the exhibition areas of the Gallery's new building.
The staff of the Gallery is being augmented as rapidly as funds permit and qualified personnel can be recruited. The director entered on duty July 1, 1964. At the end of the year neither the position of associate director nor that of historian-biographer had been filled, but prospects seemed good for obtaining outstanding men for these positions and for getting the archival programs of the Gallery organized and underway. Staff members appointed during the year include Robert G. Stewart, associate curator; William Walker, librarian; Mrs. Shirley Harren, library assistant; Barnard Lebowitz, museum aide; Mrs. Genevieve Kennedy, museum specialist; Jean T. Adamonis, secretary; Carol Hutchinson and Barbara Boiling, clerk-typists.
During the year the accessions listed on pages 346-348 came as gifts to the collections of the Gallery. Of these, the 34 likenesses transferred to our collection by the National Gallery of Art as a gift from the late Andrew Mellon constitute an outstandingly important accession during the Gallery's initial year of operation. An additional portrait of John James Audubon by his son was the gift of the Avalon Foundation. For other gifts, such as the portrait of John Jordan Crittenden by George P. A. Healy from Silas B. McKinley and that of Charles Lee from Mrs. A. D. Pollack Gilmour, the Gallery is particularly grateful. These portraits come to us as gifts from descendents of the sitters, the ideal but no longer, unfortunately, the usual way of objects being added to the collections.
In July Dr. Klein collaborated with representatives of the Division of Biology and Medicine, U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, to deter- mine the feasibility of making a prospective population genetics study in Iceland; he also surveyed sites near Keflavik, Iceland, to evaluate the possibility of establishing a field station for measuring solar radia- tion in high northern latitudes. In August Dr. Klein attended the Fourth International Photobiology Congress in Oxford, England, and participated in a symposium on phytochrome research.
In June and July Dr. Shropshire consulted with investigators in photobiology and biophysics at Gif-Sur-Yvette, Zurich, Tubingen, Freiburg, Eindhoven, Wageningen, Amsterdam, Copenhagen, Uppsala, and Stockholm. During this trip he presented a lecture at Le Phyto- tron, Gif-Sur-Yvette, entitled "Phytochrome Controlled Responses" and one at the Max-Planck Institut fur Biologie, Tubingen, entitled "Light-Induced Biochemical Changes and High Intensity Range Responses of Phycomyces." In August he attended the Photobiology Congress at Oxford and presented a symposium lecture, "Photoresponses in Phycomyces Sporangiophores," at the 10th International Botanical Congress in Edinburgh.
In August the American Institute of Biological Sciences meeting in Boulder, Colo., was attended by Dr. Correll, Mr. Edwards, Dr. Klein, Dr. Loercher, Dr. Margulies, and Dr. Mitrakos. Dr. Correll presented a paper on "Alkali-Stable RNA Fragments from Chlorella," and Mr.
Edwards and Dr. Klein presented recent data on "Relationship of Phytochrome Concentration and Physiological Responses."
Dr. Klein participated in the executive committee sessions of the American Society of Plant Physiologists.
Mr. Harrison attended the Advanced Seminar for Scientific Glass- blowers held in August at the State University of New York, Alfred, NY.
In March Dr. Klein attended the meetings of the Solar Energy Society in Phoenix, Ariz., and in April he was a participant in the 18th Annual Research Conference in Gatlinburg sponsored by the Biology Division of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Also in March Dr. Correll was invited to present a seminar, "RNA Polyphosphate in Algae," to the Department of Botany, University of California, Berkeley, and Dr. Shropshire was invited to present a lecture on "Phycomyces Research" to the Department of Biology of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
In March Dr. Shropshire consulted with Dr. Cairns of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory of Quantitative Biology to make arrange- ments for cooperatively offering, with Dr. Dennison of Dartmouth and Dr. Delbriick of the California Institute of Technology, an intensive course to be supported by the National Science Foundation on sensory physiology and the photoresponses of Phycomyces.
In April Dr. Correll attended the meetings of the American Chemical Society held in Detroit, Mich., and Mr. Long attended the annual meetings of the American Geophysical Society in Washington, D.C.
Dr. Margulies presented a paper entitled "Effect of Chloramphenicol on Structure and Protein Composition of Bean Chloroplasts" to the Washington Area Section of the American Society of Plant Physiolo- gists, held at the University of Maryland in May.
Dr. Shropshire was an invited participant at the Thirtieth Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology held in June on sensory receptors.
In May Mr. Long visited the Lamont Geological Observatory in Palisades, N.Y., to use their mass spectrograph for C 13 analysis. He also attended the carbon dating conference held at Washington State University in June and presented a paper, "Techniques of Methane Preparation for Carbon Dating."
Scientists who joined the staff during the year are Dr. Bernard Nebel, plant physiologist, and Dr. Robert Rogers, cytogeneticist. Dr. Kon-
One of the most successful new programs was a series of free film pres- entations, known as the Smithsonian Free Film Theater. The Theater presents unusual films that are entertaining as well as educational. Showing is augmented by brief introductory remarks from noted scien- tists and specialists whose work often is seen in the films. The enormous response to this new program from museum visitors is further proof of the great potential of the Smithsonian as a practitioner of the special art of museum education. This program was organized and operated by audiovisual specialist Mary Ann Friend and Mrs. Linda Gordon, docent in zoology.
For the eleventh consecutive year the Junior League of Washington continued its volunteer docent program, conducting school classes from the greater Washington area through the Smithsonian. The program was carried out through the cooperation of G. Carroll Lindsay, curator of the Smithsonian Museum Service, with Mrs. Arnold B. McKinnon, chairman of the League's docent committee, and Mrs. Joseph Smith, Jr. co-chairman. Mrs. Smith will serve as chairman for the forthcoming year, with Mrs. Gilbert Grosvenor as co-chairman.
In addition to Mrs. McKinnon and Mrs. Smith, the members of the League's guided tour committee were: Mrs. Roger Block, Mrs. Thomas A. Bradford, Jr., Mrs. Reginald Bragonier, Mrs. Keith A. Garr, Mrs. Challen E. Caskie, Mrs. Thomas R. Cate, Mrs. C. A. Child, Mrs. F. David Clarke, Mrs. Steven Conger, Mrs. Phillip Dearborn, Mrs. Henry M. deButts, Mrs. James L. Dooley, Mrs. Robert T. Foley, Mrs. George Gerber, Mrs. Gilbert Grosvenor, Mrs. Franklin Hart, Mrs. William Henry, Mrs. Scott Heuer, Mrs. Walter M. Johnson, Jr., Mrs. Vernon Knight, Mrs. Lansing Lamont, Mrs. James H. Lefeaver, Miss Robbin Liggett, Mrs. Dickson R. Loos, Mrs. James Mailliard, Mrs. John Manfuso, Jr., Mrs. Ernest May, Mrs. H. Roemer McPhee, Jr., Mrs. James E. Miller, Mrs. William Minshall, Jr., Mrs. R. Kendall Nottingham, Mrs. Edward Outlaw, Mrs. Jack Osburn, Jr., Mrs. Robert Point, Mrs. L. Edgar Prina, Mrs. W. James Sears, Mrs. E. Tilman Stirling, Mrs. William R. Stratton, Mrs. Charles Turner, Mrs. John S. Voorhees, Mrs. Richard Wallis, Mrs. Keith Wheelock, Mrs. Mark White, and Mrs. Kennedy Wilson.
Mrs. Linda Gordon, docent in zoology, and Mrs. Marjorie Halpin, docent in anthropology, responded to requests for services and informa- tion in their special fields. They also assisted members of the scientific staff with the training of the Junior League volunteer guides, and prepared bibliographies for use in responding to inquiries from the public. Mrs. Gordon, in conjunction with her responsibilities to the Free Film Theater, wrote several film reviews. Mrs. Halpin wrote and revised information leaflets and prepared a manuscript for an illustrated booklet on George Catlin's Indian paintings.
The Urban Service Corps, as in the past, held several summer sessions at the Smithsonian. Mrs. Linda Gordon organized the classes at the museums, providing speakers, films, and tours.
Mrs. Paul Scott made a study of a membership program for the Smithsonian. She visited other museums and spoke and corresponded with persons well known for their work in this area. Her report encompassed not only operation of such a program but also activities and publications offered to the members — activities and publications designed to attract further interest in the Institution.
Mrs. Mary A. Huffer was designated acting librarian, and Jean Chandler Smith transferred from the Department of the Interior Library on January 18, 1965, to become assistant librarian. Mrs. Mary C. Quinn was appointed to the new position, secretary to the librarian, on February 21, 1965.
Janet Dickson, chief of the catalog section since October 1959, transferred to the Library of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare on November 21, 1964. Clarice M. Barker has been acting chief of the catalog section since that time. Mrs. Vija Karklins was appointed senior cataloger in April 1965 to replace Mrs. E. C. Bach- rach, who transferred to the National Agricultural Library in Decem- ber. Mrs. Angeline Ashford was appointed junior cataloger in February to fill the vacancy created when Salavador Waller left to become librarian at the D.C. General Hospital in January. Mrs. Maria Bazylewicz transferred in April 1965 from the section of numis- matics in the Museum of History and Technology to fill the position of library assistant. Carol B. Boyd was appointed library assistant on September 9, 1964.
In the reference and circulation section the following staff changes took place during the past year : Mrs. Gloria Mauney resigned August 28, 1964, after being with the library for 9 years, to take a position with the D.C. School System. A. James Spohn, entomology librarian, was detailed part time and later transferred full time to the Central Library reference staff. Mrs. Sue Chen was appointed on August 15, 1964, to the newly created position of reference librarian. Thomas Harper was appointed on June 27, 1965, as loan-desk librarian to replace Thomas Wilding, who had transferred to the acquisitions section.
Mildred D. Raitt was promoted to assistant chief of the acquisitions section on February 28, 1965. Mrs. Shirley S. Harren transferred to the National Collection of Fine Arts /National Portrait Gallery staff on January 3, 1965, and, to fill the vacancy thus created, Thomas
Wilding was made exchange librarian on March 28, 1965. Mrs. Jeannette L. Mills was appointed clerk-typist on September 5, 1964. All the vexing problems associated with so many personnel changes and vacancies, as can be seen from reading the above, have plagued the Library during the past year.
Mrs. Lewis H. Weld, Arlington, Va. Breeskin, Adelyn D. The graphic work of Mary Cassatt; a catalogue raisonne.
John Gordon L. Cryer, Newark, N.J. A collection of eleven books on covered bridges from Mrs. Samuel Reed,
Miss Elizabeth Spratt, Sydney, Australia. Roebling, John A. Report on the Niagara Railway Suspension Bridge. 1855,
Williston, Samuel W. Manual of North American diptera. 3d ed. 1908, from Mrs. Lewis H. Weld, Arlington, Va.
In this series, under the immediate direction of Mrs. Nancy Link Powars, the following papers were issued:
The gown of Mrs. John F. Kennedy. [Supplement to "The Dresses of the First Ladies of the White House," by Margaret W. Brown, published by the Smithsonian Institution in 1952. (Publ. 4060).] September 25, 1964. (50 cents.)
The editorial work continued under the immediate direction of Mrs. Eloise B. Edelen. The following publications were issued:
Requests for publications and information showed a substantial increase during the year. The Publications Distribution Section, under the immediate supervision of Mrs. Eileen M. McCarthy, received 41,014 requests for publications from foreign and domestic libraries, universities, research institutions, educational establishments, and individuals throughout the world.
Three new editors were added to the staff of the division during the past year: Harriet T. Douty on July 13, 1964; Ernest E. Biebighauser on August 2, 1964; and Mrs. Joan B. Horn on September 8, 1964.
Mrs. Dorothy M. Watson was. appointed clerk-stenographer on March 31, 1965, following the resignation of Sue D. Wallace on January 29, 1965.
Noyes, Frank B., for use in connection with the col- lection of dolls placed in the U.S. National Museum through the interest of Mr. and Mrs. Noyes „ 1,574.79 77.21
Survey of dominica Project." Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Campbell, a gift to the Zoo Animal Fund. Joanne Toor Cummings, a gift for the purpose of acquiring ceramics and glass. DeBeers Consolidated Mines, Ltd., a gift to defray travel expenses to South
Technology. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, a gift for the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Fund. R. M. Griffin, a gift to the Zoo Animal Fund. E. P. Henderson, a gift for the support of research entitled "Meteorite and
Willard W. Becklund (Helminthology) , J. Bruce Bredin (Biology), Ailsa M. Clark (Marine Invertebrates), Allen McIntosh (Mollusks), J. Percy Moore 1 (Marine In- vertebrates), Waldo L. Schmitt (Marine Invertebrates), Benjamin Schwartz (Hel- minthology), Mrs. Mildred Stratton Wilson (Copepod Crustacea)
Mrs. Arthur M. Greenwood (Cultural History), Elmer C. Herber (History), Ivor Noel Hume (Cultural History), Fred W. McKay (Numismatics), Mrs. Emery May Norweb (Numismatics), R. Henry Norweb (Numismatics), Mrs. Joan Pear- son Watkins (Cultural History)
Frank A. Taylor Helena M. Weiss George Weiner John E. Anglim, Chief A. Gilbert Wright, Assistant Chief Julius Tretick, Production Supervisor Benjamin W. Lawless, Chief William M. Clark, Jr., Production Super- visor Charles H. Olin, Chief Mrs. Jacqueline S. Olin, Chemist
Specialist Mrs. Mabel A. Byrd Richard B. Woodbury, Acting Head Mrs. M. Blaker, Archivist Henry B. Collins, Senior Scientist Waldo R. Wedel, Senior Scientist Joseph Andrews, Exhibit Specialist Saul H. Riesenberg, Curator in Charge Clifford Evans, Jr., Associate Curator William H. Crocker, Associate Curator Kent V. Flannery, Associate Curator
Mrs. Grace Rogers Cooper, Curator Rita J. Adrosko, Associate Curator Paul V. Gardner, Curator J. Jefferson Miller II, Associate Curator
Curator Keith E. Melder, Associate Curator Mrs. Anne W. Murray, Associate Curator Herbert R. Collins, Assistant Curator Mrs. Claudia B. Kidwell, Assistant Curator C. Malcolm Watkins, Curator Howard M. Brown, Associate Curator Mrs. Cynthia A. Hoover, Associate Curator Rodris C. Roth, Associate Curator Carl H. Scheele, Associate Curator in Charge Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli, Curator Mrs. Elvira Clain-Stefanelli, Associate
An accomplishment of particular significance has been achieved by David L. Correll in the field of protein chemistry. One of the studies in this area has been the isolation of phy to- chrome, a proteinaceous pigment occurring in all higher forms of plants. This pigment serves as a photoreceptor that absorbs the radiant energy which regulates the morphological develop- ment of plants and that is controlled by the red and far-red portions of the visible spectrum. Without phytochrome there would presumably, be no stem elongation, no leaf expansion, and no flowering in the higher plants. It is only in the past few years that this pigment has been isolated, and then in impure form. Dr. Correll has isolated phytochrome in pure form and, with collaborators from the National Institutes of Health, has determined its amino acid content, molecular weight, and fluo- rescence spectrum, information that will undoubtedly lead to defining the metabolic role and physiological responses occurring as a result of the pigment's regulatory action.
The scholarly sessions were held in the Departmental Auditorium. The Auditorium is located on Constitution Avenue, opposite the Museum of History and Technology. Below: Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson and Secre- tary Ripley greet Bicentennial Celebration guests at the White House lawn party and reception Friday afternoon, September 17.
Ostracodes are microscopic arthropods that leave an abundant fossil record. The history to be learned from their remains may reflect changes in shorelines, formation of estuaries, drying up of lakes, and elevation or depression of the deep ocean floor. Dr. Richard H. Benson and his associate Dr. Rosalie F.
Through the support of the Office of Ecology under Helmut K. Buechner, the department of vertebrate zoology in January 1966 participated in the establishment of the Area de Pesquisas Ecologicas do Guama (APEG), Belem, Brazil. APEG was es- tablished through a series of official announcements by Dr. Jose Maria Conduru, Director of the Instituto de Pesquisas e Esperi- mentacao Agropecuarias do Norte (IPEAN). In addition, a Commission for the Coordination of Research Activities was formed to review and coordinate research at APEG. A pri- mary objective of APEG is the establishment of a broad program of basic research on the ecology of the Amazonian forest — one which will also offer scientific training directly related to re- gional needs. Both the Smithsonian and IPEAN are collabo- rating in the development of a scientific program for APEG through the provision of grants from the Smithsonian and of facilities, personnel, and equipment from IPEAN. From this support have sprung research programs on soils, botany, ento- mology, and epidemiology. Other institutions participating with IPEAN and the Smithsonian are the Belem Virus Labora- tory (Instituto Evandro Chagas), the Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi, the Escola de Agronomia de Amazonia (Belem), the University of Brasilia, the Faculdade de Filosofia (Rio Claro, Sao Paulo), and INPA (Manaus). These institutions are all represented in the membership of the Commission for the Coordination of Research Activities on APEG.
Continued vitality and energy has been evidenced in the work of the National Collection of Fine Arts and the National Portrait Gallery. Three exhibitions at the National Collection this year included important catalogs containing research material brought together by the staff: Mrs. Adelyn Breeskin's Roots of Abstract Art in America 1910-1930; Richard Wunder's Frederic Edwin Church, for a retrospective exhibit of the great American landscapist; and David W. Scott's American Landscape, a Changing Frontier.
The most notable contributions of the President and Mrs. Johnson to the artistic life of the capital, and indeed of the Nation, occurred this year when, as a result of their direct con- cern and intercession, Mr. Joseph H. Hirshhorn decided to present his collection of nearly sixty-seven hundred objects of painting and sculpture to the United States. The Smithsonian will act as custodian of this vast collection, valued at in excess of twenty-five million dollars. This is one of the three great art events of this century in Washington, the others being the Charles Lang Freer Gift of 1915 and the Andrew W. Mellon gift of 1938, continued so munificently by himself and his chil- dren. A site has now been chosen and approved by the Congress for this great Hirshhorn collection.
Important changes took place within the Secretary's immediate staff during the year. Dr. Sidney R. Galler, formerly head of the Biology Branch in the Office of Naval Research, was appointed to the position of Assistant Secretary (Science). This position had been unfilled since T. Dale Stewart's return to fulltime research in the Office of Anthropology.
After more than seven years of service as a staff assistant to the Secretary, Dr. T. W. Taylor resigned to accept appointment as Deputy Commissioner, Bureau of Indian Affairs.
The Institution's largest museums gained new directors. Dr. Richard S. Cowan, a member of the department of botany from 1957 and Assistant Director of the Museum of National History since 1 962, became Director of the Museum, succeeding T. Dale Stewart. Dr. Robert P. Multhauf was appointed the second director of the Museum of History and Technology after John C. Ewers' return to the Office of Anthropology as senior scientist.
Upon the retirement of Paul H. Oehser as Chief, Editorial and Publication Division, Anders Richter came to the Institution from the University of Chicago Press. Under Mr. Richter's direction this division has been reorganized into the Smithsonian Press. THE BOARD OF REGENTS
The customary informal dinner meeting, preceding the annual meeting, was held on January 26, 1966, in the Great Hall of the Smithsonian Institution Building. Dr. Harold Stern, Assistant Director of the Freer Gallery, spoke on Japanese hand scrolls; Mr. Charles Olin, Chief of the Conservation Laboratory, spoke on the Smithsonian's new conservation program. Mr. Donald McClelland, Assistant to the Director of the National Collection of Fine Arts, gave a presentation on the White House Art Project. The annual meeting was held on January 27, 1966, in the Regents Room.
The spring meeting of the Board of Regents was held on May 1 7, 1966, in the Regents Room. At the conclusion of the meeting a brief installation ceremony was held in the Great Hall to recognize the recent appointments of Dr. Richard S. Cowan as Director of the Museum of Natural History and Dr. Robert P. Multhauf as Director of the Museum of History and Technology. The reception was followed by an informal dinner in the Associates Hall.
In the exercise of this program, the Institution has been especially interested in supporting projects in those excess-currency countries where American institutions have had little or no opportunity for archeological investigation. For this reason special attention was given to the establishment of the American Academy of Benares through a grant to the American Institute of Indian Studies at Poona, a research center administered by the University of Pennsylvania. The guiding purpose of the Academy at Benares is quite clear. Experts have long maintained that the archeology and art history of India are so rich that often the most difficult question is where to begin. The Benares Academy seeks to answer this question by conducting long- range surveys which will document, record, and photograph ancient temples and both above-ground and below-ground archeological sites throughout India, as a prerequisite to the determination of in- telligent research priorities. With the appointment of Dr. Pramod Chandra of the University of Chicago as resident director, the Academy began operations in September 1965 in the historic Rewa
In addition, the Office helps in or assumes total responsibility for programming the visits of foreign grantees coming to the United States under State Department or other exchange programs. Following the Smithson Bicentennial, a six-week study and observation tour was arranged for Dr. Mehmet Onder, Director of Antiquities of the Turkish Ministry of Education, and Dr. Raci Temezer, Director of the Hittite Museum in Ankara, as well as one-week tours for Dr. Hamit Kosay, Director of the Ethnographic Museum of Turkey, and Dr. Tahsin Dolunay, Director of the Topkapi Museum in Istanbul. Following their return to Turkey, the United States Embassy in Ankara reported that the visits of these museum directors had been instrumental in creating a favorable climate for increased exchange of exhibits and increased opportunities for American archeologists wishing to work in Turkey. Dr. Kosay published an account of his visit and his observa- tions of the Smithsonian in the Bulletin of the Turkish Historical Society.
From January to March 1966, Joseph A. Patterson, Director of the American Association of Museums, made extensive visits to museums in the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and the Far East. The purpose of this trip, funded and planned by the Office of International Activities, was first to determine what needs to be done by museums in the develop- ing world in order to better realize their potential for public education and second what American museums can do to help. Mr. Patterson discovered that the priority need, common to all countries visited, was for trained museum personnel, before improved facilities. Although physical plants and exhibit facilities are in most cases inadequate,
Mr. Patterson found that foreign museum directors themselves under- stood that new museums or new exhibit techniques cannot be success- fully planned or maintained without at least a strong nucleus of trained museum professionals in each country. Highlights of his trip included a meeting with Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India, who expressed herself as extremely interested in museum education, and conferences with Korean officials which laid a firm groundwork for the establish- ment of a National Science Museum in Seoul.
Brief conferences and observation tours with the Smithsonian's scientific or administrative staff were arranged for a total of 37 foreign grantees coming through Washington under State Department, Agency for International Development, Department of Health, Education and Welfare, and other auspices. A number of these visitors were ranking government officials interested in learning about the organization of the Smithsonian itself, as an example of how federal and private sources in the United States combine to support museums, basic research in the sciences or humanities, and the performing arts. Included in this category were M. Michel Pomey of France, Chief of Mission and General Counsel to the Ministry of Cultural Affairs; Dr. Dusan Popovski of Yugoslavia, Member of Parliament and former head of the Secretariat for Education and Culture; Dr. Zaven Hacobian of Iran, Director General of the Cultural Relations Department of the Ministry of Culture and Arts; and Mr. Mapatunage James Perera of Ceylon, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs. Other visitors were primarily interested in museum administration or museum education; among them were Dr. Abdem Ramon Lancini, Director of the Museum of Natural Sciences of Caracas, Venezuela, who came to study the administration of science museums, and a group of ten Ugandan secondary school and college instructors, who conferred with Smithsonian staff members on the role of museums in supple- mentary primary education.
But perhaps the greatest benefit of the Bicentennial, in the view of the Office of International Activities, were the many opportunities to confer with foreign scholars and museum curators concerning future collaboration or the establishment of programs of common interest. Thus, for example, conversations were held with Drs. Mohamed Jacoub and Mohamed Masmoudi, Directors of Tunisian National Museums and the Sfax Ethnographical Museum, respectively, and Dr. Kazimierz Michalowski, Deputy Director of the National Museum in Warsaw, concerning extension of the Foreign Currency Program to Tunisia and Poland. Discussion concerning cooperative museum projects were held with Dr. Karl Katz, Director of the Bezaliel (Na- tional Museum) in Israel, Dr. Ajit Mookerjee, Director of the National Crafts Museum of India, and many others.
Above: Philistine votive tablet dating from the 11th century, found during the Carnegie Museum-Pittsburgh Theological Seminary excavations at Ashdod, Israel, in July 1965, under the direction of Dr. James L. Swauger.
Overleaf: Egyptian laborers at Mendes, a stratified Pharonic site in the Nile Delta, under the direction of Dr. Donald Hansen of the American Research Center in Egypt.
Toward the close of the period under review, the Office Director held preliminary conversations with Mr. Jack Vaughn, Director of the Peace Corps, concerning possible Peace Corps-Smithsonian projects utilizing Volunteers in conservation education, ecological surveys and major archeological excavations.
The Junior League of Washington donated its 12th year of service to the elementary schools of the Greater Washington Area. The program of tours was conducted by the Museum Service in cooperation with Mrs. Gilbert M. Grosvenor, Mrs. Joseph Smith, Jr., and Mrs. Ernest N. May, Jr., chairmen of the Junior League Guide Program, and with the curatorial staff of the Smithsonian. More than 32,000 children were taken on 1,137 tours during the school year. The Junior League tour service is a significant contribution to the Institution's educational program. Teachers from the area were invited to come and help the guides and curators develop scripts that would follow closely the cur- riculum of the local school systems.
The Society of Associates began its first year under the joint guidance of Mrs. Vernon Knight and Mr. G. Carroll Lindsay, Director of the Museum Service. The tremendous success of its membership drive has been both an exciting experience and a rewarding insight into the interest in our Museums among the general public, not only here in Washington but throughout the country.
On May 1, 1966, Mrs. Vernon Knight, executive secretary of the Associates, resigned to take up residence in Texas and G. Carroll Lindsay, director of the Smithsonian Museum Service, assumed the position as acting executive secretary. On June 1, Mrs Lisa Suter, formerly membership secretary for the Corcoran Gallery of Art, joined the staff as program director, with responsibility for planning and directing the various programs of lectures, films, children's events, and other educational activities.
Dr. Cowan, botanist, came to the Smithsonian Institution in 1957 as associate curator of botany and served from 1962 as assistant and later as deputy director of the Museum of Natural History. He was appointed Director in December 1965. Dr. Multhauf, historian of science, joined the Smithsonian staff in April 1 954 as curator of engi- neering and has served as chairman of the department of science and technology of the Museum of History and Technology since June 1957. He was appointed Director on April 4, 1966.
The Director, United States National Museum, at the invitation of Dr. Roland Force, Director of the Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu, Hawaii, acted as one of several consultants advising on proposals to expand the scope of that museum in fields of archives, Hawaiian history, and the history of technology and industry in the State.
The Director, with others, discussed with Dr. Grover Murray, incoming President of Texas Technological College, the development of the University Museum as a teaching aid and as a source of educa- tional exhibits for developing countries, as part of Dr. Murray's plans for an international center for research in the utilization of arid and semi-arid lands.
The oldest American man-of-war still in existence, the gunboat Philadelphia, was installed adjacent to the ordnance hall under the design supervision of Mr. Brown. Adjacent exhibits cases and panels document the strategically important battle of Valcour Island and the part played in that battle by the crew of the Philadelphia.
The last two permanent exhibit halls opened during this fiscal year were the hall of medicine and dentistry and the hall of pharmacy. In these, a series of cases and period rooms portray in chronological order the development of the healing arts from Greek and Roman times to the present. The halls were designed by Mr. Clendening and the exhibits were installed by production teams led by Mr. Lewis.
Also during this fiscal year, the exhibits editor's office, which formerly reported to the Director, was transferred to the office of exhibits. Under the direction of chief exhibits editor George Weiner, assisted by Mrs. Constance R. Minkin, the office is responsible for writing or rewriting, editing, coordination, and printing liaison of all exhibits labels for the U.S. National Museum and, as the need arises, elsewhere in the Smithsonian Institution. During this year, Mr. Weiner and his staff, which includes Mis. Edna W. Wright and Nicholas Rona, produced 8165 labels for 78 permanent and special exhibits of museums and offices of the Smithsonian Institution.
The new hall of gems, designed by Mrs. Dorothy Guthrie, was opened in September 1965 during the Bicentennial Celebration, and the new jade room, also designed by Mrs. Guthrie, was opened in
December. Also opened during the year were extensions of the cultures of Africa and Asia hall, designed by Lucius E. Lomax; the hall of osteology, designed by Morris Pearson; the hall of physical anthropology, designed by Joseph Shannon; and the life in the sea hall, also designed by Mr. Shannon. In June the reptile and amphibian section of the hall of cold-blooded vertebrates, designed by James Speight, was opened.
During the year, the illustration section, under Christopher H. Reinecke, produced nearly 200 drawings, paintings, charts, and other illustrations for use in exhibits. The models, dioramas, and accessories section, headed by John Babyak, produced diorama figurines and life-size figures for life groups, foreground accessories, replicas of marine invertebrates, and other models. The plastics section, under John C. Widener, continued research into new plastics molding and casting techniques and produced a large variety of small and large plastic casts faithful in surface detail to the originals. Among the more notable were a Semitic storm god for the hall of Old World archeology; a basking shark for the life in the sea hall; life-size mannequins for the MHT First Ladies hall; and such diversified objects as lava formations, meteorites, and Corinthian capitals. The freeze-dry microbiology laboratory, under Rolland O. Hower, continued its work in perfecting this Smithsonian-developed preservation process, which has virtually supplanted the more tedious taxidermy procedures in the preparation of small animals for exhibition purposes. The new section of lighting and audio-visual techniques, headed by Carroll B. Lusk, devised new methods for illuminating diamonds, sapphires, and other precious stones; and Mr. Lusk, assisted by James C. Nyce, engineered an exceed- ingly popular audio-visual exhibition of African musical instruments for the cultures of Africa and Asia hall and conducted extensive research into visitor-operated random-access slide projectors to be used in both the Museums of Natural History and the Museum of History and Technology.
The larger, important exhibitions of 1 966 included Diirer and His Time, from Berlin, Pre-Columbian Gold from Peru, Rugs From the McMullan Collection, from Mr. Joseph McMullan, and Art Treasures of Turkey, from Ankara and Istanbul. An extension of the loan of 7,000 Tears of Iranian Art permitted this exhibition to be shown at the Allentown Art Museum, an action given favorable notice in an article "Big Show, Small Museum" that appeared in Arts Magazine (December 1965). Catalogs were published for the Diirer, Latin American, McMullan and Turkish exhibitions, and a leaflet on Irish architecture and monu- ments. John Canaday wrote in The New York Times that the catalog Diirer and His Times, which was reprinted three times, is "a must for every art library."
In biological research, the necessity for studying organisms in their living condition has understandably led to increased scientific travel to the field. It is with the deepest sadness and a sense of irreparable loss that it must be reported that one of the research staff gave his life in the service of science during the past year. Dr. E. Yale Dawson, whose article immediately follows this statement, was drowned in the Red Sea June 22 while studying the kinds, distribution, and ecological relationships of the marine algae there. An incredibly well-organized
Recognizing this need, the Smithsonian Institution in 1965 began to encourage the preparation of identification manuals on the marine plants of the Pacific Coast. In cooperation with Humboldt State College at Areata, California, and the National Science Foundation, a course in marine botany was presented, and, with che help of the class, an identification manual was written for the seaweeds in the vicinity of the new marine facility at nearby Trinidad. Currently, in collaboration with the University of Arizona and the Office of Naval Research, a similar manual is being completed for the algal flora near the new marine facility, on the upper Gulf of California, jointly operated by the University of Arizona and the University of Sonora. . Obviously, the rapid development of marine laboratory facilities of California, of which a major new one is that established on Catalina Island by the University of Southern California, makes imperative a modern and thorough treatment of the marine algae of the entire State. The Smithsonian, through arrangement with the Stanford University Press and with partial support of the Office of Naval Research, is now engaged in preparing such a "Marine Algae of California," coauthored by Dr. Isabella Abbott of the Hopkins Marine Station, Dr. G. J. Hollenberg of the University of Redlands, Dr. Paul C. Silva of the University of California at Berkeley, and the writer. This study involves the treatment and illustration of nearly a thousand species. Many of these, especially the deepwater forms, have re- mained underscribed to date, and new entities are being discovered regularly as underwater explorations are conducted by diver-botantists. The Smithsonian Institution has been collaborating with the Uni- versity of California at Santa Barbara in such exploration in the southern California Channel Islands, through Dr. Michael Neushul and his students at the marine laboratory in Goleta.
Beginning in spring 1965, fieldwork directed toward assembling an extensive working collections of liquid-preserved algae was undertaken in California, in the Gulf of California, and in the Bahamas. A fortunate circumstance early in this program led to the acquisition by the Smithsonian of the large herbarium of the Beaudette Foundation for Biological Research, containing over 7,300 specimens, including 1500 liquid preparations and 700 microscope slides. This algarium was incorporated into the Museum's herbarium during summer 1965, and to the combined collection nearly 10,000 specimens have since been added through the able assistance of museum technician Charles F. Rhyne. Fieldwork is currently being continued through cooperation with several foreign algologists, who arranged field collecting trips for the writer during the summer of 1966. These include Dr. B. Toziin, University of Istanbul, Turkey; Prof. Joseph Powell, American Uni-
Another major asset to the program of floristic studies and the prep- aration of manuals of Pacific American marine algae has been provided by the cooperation of the Allan Hancock Foundation at the University of Southern California. Its director, Dr. Leslie A. Chambers, has agreed to place on 5-year loan to the Smithsonian Institution the 26,000 algal specimens of its herbarium. The availability of these collections, assembled by the writer during 20 years' research in the Pacific, will greatly enhance and speed the current program.
In recognition of the challenges and opportunities in the field of environmental biology, the Smithsonian on July 1, 1965, established an Office of Ecology. This new Office is headed by Dr. Helmut K. Buechner, formerly professor of zoology at Washington State Uni- versity, Pullman, Washington.
The International Biological Program (IBP), which has a strong focus on environmental biology with a view toward broadening the productivity base for human populations, will provide unprecedented opportunity for ecological research and international conservation efforts during the 5-year period from 1967 to 1972. The Smithsonian will be engaged in the terrestrial conservation program of the IBP. Dr. Lee M. Talbot, an internationally known conservationist on the staff of the Office of Ecology, will work closely with the terrestrial conservation section of the IBP in the establishment of a World Network of Nature Reserves and the development of a world program in conservation. It is highly important that ecological benchmarks be
During 1965 the Smithsonian established the Chesapeake Bay Center for Field Biology on about 700 acres of land about 7 miles south of Annapolis, on the west shore of the Bay. To the original Forrest bequest, known as Java Farm, the southern portion of Ivy Neck has been added through the cooperation of Miss Adelaide Colhoun and a generous grant from the Ford Foundation. The Smithsonian on February 9, 1966, formed a consortium with The Johns Hopkins University and the University of Maryland for coopera- tion in research and education. It is an open-ended consortium, which may be joined by other universities in the Washington area, in what it is hoped will become an intellectually stimulating venture. Dr. Kyle Barbehenn, Director for the new Center, is now planning a well- rounded research program with the universities, including studies of vegetation change, field and laboratory studies of social behavior of mammals, estuarian ecology, and population regulation.
One of our most important facilities in the developing ecological program is the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (formerly the Canal Zone Biological Area). Over the past 20 years an impressive series of studies have emanated from this island station. Recent em- phasis, under the excellent leadership of its Director, Martin H. Moynihan, has been on comparative behavior of primates, the evolution of interspecific relations, the significance of social signal systems, social organization and behavior of tropical birds, and isolating mechanisms in marine fishes (a detailed report of this work appears on p. 1 63) . STRI provides a model and a base for expanding ecological research in the New World tropics. Increased activity in tropical research has been initiated under the guidance of Dr. F. Raymond Fosberg, a newly appointed specialist on tropical biology who comes to the Smithsonian
The first volume of Alexander Wetmore's Birds of Panama was issued in December. Dr. Wetmore conducted field work in south- western Chiriqui (Panama) from January until March.
Supported by a Guggenheim Fellowship, Dr. Jayme de Loyola e Silva, Universidad do Parana, Curitiba, Brazil, was in residence in the division of Crustacea studying the collections of sphaeromatid isopods. NAS-NRC visiting research associate F. J. S. Maturo, from the University of Florida, continued his systematic studies in the division of echinoderms on the bryozoans of the Atlantic continental shelf in general, and of the southeast coast of the United States in particular. Also, during the past year, Dr. I. Canet was in residence in the division of Crustacea. She has nearly completed a revision of the economically important western Atlantic species of penaeid shrimps.
Research associate Doris H. Blake continued work on her review of the chrysomelid beetle genus Glyptoscelis of the Western Hemisphere. Mrs. Blake collected for 10 days in Puerto Rico.
Plant species and populations are often identified today, by joint studies of ecology, cytology, phytochemistry, physiology, and other nontaxonomic disciplines. The overall activities of the department of botany are directed toward such an integrative approach to problems in plant systematics. For example, a comparative study of the philo- dendron family has recently been completed by systematist Dan H. Nicolson and plant anatomist Richard H. Eyde. This horticulturally important, pantropical family is characterized by a peculiar arrange- ment of tiny flowers around a columnar floral stalk which often pro- trudes from the base of a cuplike, expanded, or strapshaped appendage. This appendage, or spathe, may be highly colored, as in the anthuriums of commerce and the jack-in-the-pulpit. The subject of their joint investigation was the anatomical structure of the flowers themselves and its possible bearing upon intrafamilial alignment, since no modern treatment was available. Their work was facilitated by Miss Priscilla Sherwin who, as a participant in the Smithsonian summer research assistant program, prepared the microscope slides upon which the study was based and assisted with the observations. Among other findings, their research showed that the genus Lysichiton was not evolutionary primitive; that the genus Philodendron did not arise from the Pothos subfamily, as advocated by some botanists; and that Acorus (sweet flag), is unique in the family and should probably be segregated and recognized in a new subfamily. These conclusions, which could not have been reached on the basis of the systematic or anatomical evidence alone, demonstrate the value of an interdisciplinary approach to problems in systematic botany.
Mason E. Hale of the depart- ment of botany finds lichens in many habitats (see p. 102), including Japanese rooftops, here near Biwako. Below: Foreign students are shown laboratory of grass anatomy (see p. 103) by T. R. Soder- strom (right) and Dr. Cleofe E. Calderon (far left), visiting Argentinian scientist. At the microscope is former Neigh- borhood Youth Corps girl Diana Newman, who works for Smithsonian research associate.
In addition he collaborated with Dr. Habib-ur Rahman, Geological Survey of Pakistan, in a report, in press, concerning the stratigraphy of occurrence of a recently discovered fauna of marine Eocene fishes in the Dera Ghazi Khan District, West Pakistan.
Important additions to the manuscript and photographic collections received during the year include the personal papers of James Owen Dorsey, ethnologist with the Bureau of American Ethnology, 1878— 1895, a gift from J. O. Dorsey's granddaughter, Mrs. Fitzhugh McLean of Takoma Park, Maryland. These papers, consisting of diaries, correspondence, autobiographical notes, lectures, and a volume of notes on Siouan ethnography and language, have been listed in detail and fill three manuscript boxes. The original manuscript which was printed as Ojibway Texts by William Jones (Truman Michelson, ed., Publications of the American Ethnological Society, vol. 7, pts. 1, 2, 1917, 1919), but was previously uncatalogued in the archives, was identified and arranged by comparison with the pub- lished texts. The originals include partial interlinear translations as well as the full English translations that were published. About
In the division of birds over 400 new cases were added to the specimen storage area. With a few exceptions, anatomical specimens of birds preserved in fluid are no longer accessioned into the collections, as they are intended for dissection and replacement rather than for permanent reference. To encourage their use by qualified investigators, a catalog of the anatomical collections is being prepared, to be available on request. During the year Mrs. Julian Stein, Jr., volunteered her services towards rearranging the egg data file, and Mrs. John W. Boyd volunteered her services for working on maps of the distribution of Antarctic birds and for translating Russian articles.
Museum aid Gloria House sorted to family nearly 84,000 beetles, mostly alcoholic material from Bolivia; she also mounted and labeled nearly 2,500 specimens, and mounted an additional 500. Mrs. Joan Ledbetter labeled, sorted and distributed over 97,000 miscellaneous insects, of which some 25 percent was Lepidoptera and Diptera. Mrs. Sophie Lutterlough restored, relabeled, and rehoused thousands of ticks, most of which had dried out, as well as great numbers of dried myriapods and arachnids; and cleaned and sorted many mi- croscope slides. Mrs. Mary Ann Floyd completed rearrangement of the Odonata collection by working over the Oriental and North American sections.
J. F. Gates Clarke continued his reorganization and classification of the Neotropical Microlepidoptera with the incorporation of over 4,000 specimens into the working collection. William D. Field transferred and reclassified several families of Lepidoptera, formerly housed in non-standard drawers; among the families transferred were the Amathusiidae, Brassolidae, and our extensive collection of Old World Papilionidae. Ralph E. Crabill found and verified the status of some dozen type specimens of the C. H. Bollman myriapod collection; he continued remounting O. F. Cook's microscopic slides, mostly typical, and he restored, relabeled, and rehoused large numbers of dried myriapods and arachnids, some of which turned out to be unsuspected type specimens. Research associate K. C. Emerson transferred and expanded the Mallophaga collection into new slide boxes; during this process he added the material from the Carriker collection. Miss Helle Starcke, assistant to research associate Robert Traub, began the transfer and arrangement of the Siphonaptera collection into new slide cabinets.
An exceptionally well selected and documented collection received directly from Asia in recent years is the Province Henry collection of 201 Taiwan tribal objects consisting of clothing, religious paraphernalia, utensils, weapons, woodwork, and other items. An outstanding collec- tion of 255 purchased and donated textiles was assembled mostly in India and Thailand by Mrs. Elizabeth Bayley Willis. Other valuable collections received were a Burmese collection of 600 objects from William C. Sturtevant, 125 Korean masks of folk drama from Professor Duhyun Lee, and 135 items of Iranian costumes from Mrs. Ethel Jane Bunting. From Mrs. Mary Slusser in Nepal came jewelry, clothing, toys, and games.
Outstanding accessions of birds include a specimen of Pterodroma baraui, received by exchange through Dr. Jouanin, and a specimen of Wetmorethraupis sterrhopteron and two of Conioptilon mcilhennyi, by ex- change through Dr. Lowery. Both of these latter two genera are newly described tropical American passerines and as such represent exciting additions to the national collections. Among the anatomical speci- mens received were major collections from Chile, the Indian Ocean, and North America. Other valuable acquisitions included two skele- tons of the lesser flamingo donated by John G. Williams and skeletons of the cahow and black-capped petrel presented by David B. Wingate.
Among several important gifts by individuals to the mineral col- lection were a fine large tourmaline crystal from Madagascar, presented by Randolph Rothschild; a superb specimen of torbernite from France, by the Lester Barrer family; an extraordinary specimen of the new mineral francevillite from Gabon, by Mr. Bernard T. Rocca; and an exquisite suite of fine specimens of Mexican agate, by Colonel E. M. Barron. Other fine specimen material and much research material was obtained, as usual, through exchange. Numerous new and rare species were added including dellaite, moctezumite, sonoraite, coaling- ite, rosenhahnite, sakuralite, marokite and gaudefroyite.
As in all recent years, the gem collection has received additions of great value and importance. Chief among the gifts was a 138.7-carat star ruby. This magnificent gem, the largest and finest star ruby on record, came as a gift from Rosser Reeves. Two very large faceted gems of topaz purchased through the help of the Chamberlain fund: one, weighing 7,725 carats is golden yellow; the other, weighing 2,680 carats, is colorless. Through the Roebling fund a 55-carat faceted and flawless gem of petalite, the largest of its kind on record, was obtained. The suite of carvings was enriched by a series of 13 jade carvings given by Mrs. Mildred Taber Keally and 9 carvings of various materials given by Sidney Krandall.
The new exhibit hall of gems was completed and opened in September 1965, and the new exhibit of the Maude Monell Vetlesen collection of carved Chinese jades of the 16th to 19th centuries was opened in January 1966. Paul E. Desautels wrote the scripts for these new exhibits and the design was by Mrs. Dorothy Guthrie. Construction work was completed and installation of cases was begun on the new exhibits of physical geology and meteorites.
T7<or the National Zoological Park, the year ending June 30, 1966, -*■ was in many ways remarkable. The construction program moved ahead methodically, a scientific research department was established, additional emphasis was placed on conservation, and the breeding of exotic species added notably to the value of the animal collection. The collection continued to grow in zoological breadth and diversity. Gifts, births, purchases, and exchanges have enhanced public interest in and the scientific usefulness of the Zoo. The following summary of the animals on hand on June 30 shows the greatest number of species and of individual animals since the retirement of Dr. William M. Mann in 1956.
One of the season's unusual Zoo babies was a soulful-eyed California sea lion rejected by its mother, and in consequence hand-reared by Mrs. Jan Davis, medical technologist. For the first two days the baby was fed by stomach tube; on the third day Mrs. Davis persuaded it to accept a bottle. The formula used was —
Baby sea lions must be taught to swim. They are born on land and the mother takes her offspring to a shallow tidal pool to introduce it to the water. The Zoo's baby, known as Loo-Seal, was given her first swimming lesson when she was four weeks old in the indoor hippopotamus pool scrubbed and filled with clean water for the lesson. When Dr. Gray and Mrs. Davis first took the young animal into the water, it promptly sank to the bottom, but in a surprisingly short fifteen or twenty minutes it got the idea, and swam swiftly if sometimes awkwardly back and forth between its foster parents with obvious enjoyment. The lessons were continued until Loo-Seal was completely at home in the water.
An unusually welcome gift came from Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, who on January 12 received the Distinguished Service Award of the Na- tional Wildlife Federation. The award was accompanied by a check for $1000, which she graciously gave to the National Zoological Park for the bcautification of the Connecticut Avenue vehicular entrance.
Top left: Black-footed cat (F^/u nigripes) of South Africa, one of the smallest and rarest felines. The pads of its feet are jet black. Left center: Aardwolf {Protcles cristatus), one of a pair from the National Zoological Gardens of South Africa, in Pretoria. The bushy tail and back crest of this member of the hyena family caused the Boers to call it the "maned jackal." Lower left: Cecelia, female Masai giraffe, is the first giraffe born at the Zoo since 1957. Above: One of three serval kittens hand-reared by Mrs. Janet Davis, medical technolo- gist in the animal hospital, sits on top of the new closed-circuit TV tape- recording equipment.
Top left: Caroline, first Brasilian tapir (Tapirus terrestris) born at the Zoo in many years. It was named for Miss Caroline Jarvis of the Zoological Society of London, editor of the International Zoo Yearbook (photo by Tom Kelley, Washington Post). Top right: One of the smaller Madagascar chameleons {Chamaeleo lateralis). Right: First orangutan born in the National Zoo and mother Jennie. Named Atjeh by Smith- sonian Secretary S. Dillon Ripley for a province in Sumatra where orangutans occur. The Zoo has now successfully bred all four kinds of great apes — -gibbons, orangutans, chimpanzees, and gorillas.
Mrs. Johnson visited the Zoo and consulted with the director, the engineer, and the head gardener. The planting at this entrance has now been completed.
The U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit no. 3 in Cairo, Egypt, through the efforts of Dr. Harry Hoogstraal, a long-time friend of the Zoo, collected and shipped a number of interesting reptiles and other animals.
Recognizing the importance of the original Congressional mandate establishing the National Zoological Park "for the advancement of science," the Zoo throughout its history has made many contributions to scientific knowledge. The emphasis on science was strengthened by the formal organization last year of a division of research and by the appointment on September 1, 1965, of Dr. John F. Eisenberg as resident scientist. The staff of the research division also includes Mrs. Wyotta Holden as secretary and Eugene Maliniak as assistant. The latter has been for many years in charge of the small mammal house
Eisenberg also serves as research associate professor at University of Maryland department of zoology, which is headed by Dr. George Anastos, and there he offers graduate courses and supervises a graduate research program.
Dr. Ira Rubinoff joined the Tropical Research Institute staff in July 1965. He is continuing his long-term research on Panamanian inshore marine fishes (see below), and has taken charge of the marine lab- oratories.
A number of scientists interested in various aspects of the tropics have been made honorary research associates of the Tropical Research Institute, with the expectation that they will act as a panel to provide expert advice and assistance in developing new research projects and programs. The group includes Professor Ernst Mayr, Director of the Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University; Dr. Martin Young, Director of the Gorgas Memorial Laboratory; Dr. Robert H. Mac Arthur, of the Department of Biology, Princeton University; Dr. Giles W. Mead, Curator of Fishes, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University; Dr. Charles F. Bennett, Jr. of the Department of Geography, University of California at Los Angeles; Dr. W. John Smith of the Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania; and Mr. C. C. Soper, former Director of the Eastman Kodak Tropical Laboratory. It is planned to enlarge this group to include distinguished Latin American scientists.
The cooperative fellowship program established by the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute and the Scientific and Educational Divi- sion of the Organization of American States became operational last year. The first Fellows appointed were Mr. Maximo Galvez of Peru and Mr. Estanislau da Silveira of Brazil. Stationed on Barro Colorado Island, they are learning modern techniques, of field biology under the guidance of the resident members of the Institute staff.
The Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute can operate only with the excellent cooperation of the Canal Zone Government and the Panama Canal Company, the U.S. Army and Navy, and the govern- ment authorities of the Republic of Panama. Thanks are due especially to Executive Secretary of the Canal Zone Paul M. Runnestrand and his staff; the customs and immigration officials of the Canal Zone; the dredging division and police division of the Panama Canal Com- pany; Major General James D. Alger, Commander, U.S. Army Forces Southern Command; the late Rear Admiral Louis A. Bryan, Com- mander, U.S. Naval Forces Southern Command; Lt. Col. William Barron, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-4; Lt. Commander K. L. Robinson, Commanding Officer Naval Security Group; Mr. Thomas P. McGann, supervisor engineering technician, Navy Public Works Department: Mr. Martin J. Hayes, Army Assistant Post Engineer; the U.S. Army Maintenance Division; and the Eastman Kodak Company.
Ursula B. Marvin is studying spherules of probable cosmic origin that are found in beach sands. These are black magnetic spherules of the type found in polar ice, Pacific clays, and other environments relatively free of industrial contamination. The spherules consist of magnetite, wiistite, and hematite, and range in size from 40 to 600 microns. Mrs. Marvin is mapping the distribution of these spherules in both Pleistocene and Recent beaches.
In her study of the diamonds of the Canyon Diablo meteorite, with Clifford Frondel of Harvard University, Mrs. Marvin observed two types of diamond. 13 One, occurring in irregular masses of black fine- grain diamond, has been interpreted as metastable products of impact shock. The other type possesses the outward form of isometric single crystals, but the internal structure of polycrystalline aggregates. X-ray patterns of these diamonds display a pairing or tripling of the strongest reflections, an effect suggestive of radiation damage. This type may prove critical in the controversy over the origin of meteoritic diamonds.
While the collection of research records has steadily climbed to over 100,000 records annually, the demand for services has increased even more rapidly (approximately 25 percent over 1965). About 50,000 reports of all kinds were requested. These vary from simple requests for a single document to the preparation of catalogs that include thousands of records covering broad subject fields. SIE is the national research cataloging center for water resources investi- gations and has initiated, upon request from several federal sources, the collection and organization of information about current studies related to urban problems. Dr. Scott Keyes, University of Illinois, will spend six months at SIE assisting in the organization of this program.
In the division of ceramics and glass, compilation of the catalog of the Hans Syz collection continued, involving research by curators Paul V. Gardner and J. Jefferson Miller II in some fifteen private and museum collections and correspondence with many European col- lectors and museums. Dr. Hans Syz, donor of the collection, spent several days on this project each month at the Smithsonian and addi- tional time in Europe and Westport, Connecticut.
Curator Grace R. Cooper continued her research on the spinning wheel in America in the 1 7th through 1 9th centuries. She has completed an initial survey of private and public collections in 29 states. Completion of this project is scheduled for the coming year. As a senior technical editor for Encyclopaedia Britannica, Mrs. Cooper reviewed a number of new textile articles for technical content, and she outlined and recommended the reorganization of several existing articles.
Associate curator Elvira Clain-Stefanelli addressed the Congress of the International Federation of the Medal in Athens, Greece, as United States delegate. For this occasion she prepared a special exhibit of contemporary United States medals. Mrs. Clain-Stefanelli was re-elected a member of the Central Bureau of the International Congress of the Medal.
During the year Lundeberg conducted research at Philadelphia and Washington on the Continental gondola Philadelphia, publishing thereon a brief survey pamphlet entitled "The Continental Gunboat Philadel- phia and the Northern Campaign of 1776," which includes an illustrated account of the Battle of Valcour Island, as well as a description of the raising and preservation of the Philadelphia. Final revisions and addi- tions were made by Lundeberg to the American contribution to the Bibliography of the Great Sea Routes sponsored by The International Com- mission on Maritime History of UNESCO. A final report on this ma- jor international bibliographic enterprise was presented by Dr. Lunde- berg in November 1965 at the Annual Meeting of the Society for the History of Discoveries held at the University of Indiana. Work con- tinued on the catalog of United States warship models, and a special study of the 44-gun British ship-of-the-line America (1749) was well advanced by Merritt A. Edson, Jr., of Washington, D.C.
Research fellow Elizabeth M. Harris and museum technician James W. Norwood have undertaken a complete re-arrangement of the important collection of photomechanical prints in the division of graphic arts. Dr. Harris identified and documented numerous items hitherto undescribed, and with the help of Norwood made much- needed repairs on damaged specimens. Associate curator Eugene Ostroff treated a small selection of the collection's most valuable photo- graphs with the new technique, devised by him, for restoring faded photographs though neutron irradiation. Museum specialist Elliott Hawkins continued a long-range project of verifying equipment speci- mens with catalog cards, and he is systematically arranging the collection.
Several large specimens, attempted for the first time, including a large white embroidered counterpane, an embroidered shawl, and a hand-woven blanket, all needed for the new textile exhibit hall. Care in rinsing is of great importance in handling large items. A short, illustrated paper on the "How to Wet-Clean Undyed Cotton and Linen" submitted for publication by Miss Collins, covers the methods judged best by the division after the cleaning of over 500 articles in the laboratory during the past 4 years.
Not all instruments age so swiftly; we received from the Bureau of Standards the Meggers infra-red spectroscope with which precision spectroscopy in this country was initiated by Dr. Meggers in 1914. The instrument, although in some ways outmoded, still holds the record for long-wave measurements in the far infra-red. And a large 18th- century copper still, marked "R. Bush, Bristol, 1787," was obtained from the U.S. Department of Internal Revenue.
The medical sciences collections received 40 Limoges apothecary jars, a gift from Smith Kline & French Laboratories; and an 1896 syrup dispensing urn, donated by the Coca-Cola Co. Two 17th- century Italian majolica drug jars, a 13th-century Persian glazed- pottery mortar, and a 12th-century Persian pottery jar were purchased through the Squibb fund. The dental collections of Dr. Charles H. Land was donated by Columbia University.
Many of the 291 pieces of ceramics and glass accessioned during the year came from donors who over the years have demonstrated a continued interest in building a strong and diverse collection. Mrs. Florence E. Bushee gave 42 rare 19th century paperweights. Mrs. William A. Sutherland gave 14 pieces of 18th-century English porcelain, including a very rare pair of Bow sauceboats and a fine pair of Bow figures. Mr. and Mrs. George W. Ware presented 1 1 pieces of antique German glass; several were types previously unrepresented in the collections. Mr. and Mrs. L. Wagner gave 1 1 pieces of early Steuben glass; a welcome addition to the division's strong collection of Steuben glass. And Dr. Hans Syz gave 15 pieces of 18th-century German and English porcelain; included among these were an important Meissen tureen and an extremely fine Derby sweetmeat stand.
Four pieces of 19th-century American Tucker porcelain were purchased through the Joanne Toor Cummings Fund. Mr. and Mrs. Mayer Greenberg established a fund from which was purchased 7 pieces of contemporary pottery from the studio of Otto and Gertrud Natzler. The A. D. Alpine Company presented an electric kiln which will be used in live demonstrations of the potter's art.
The most important print accession was Kaethe Kollwitz's lithograph, Saaljruchte sol/en nicht vermahlen werden, her last print and one of only three known copies. This print was obtained with the help of a generous gift from Dr. Otto Kallir. The German Expressionist^ print
Lithograph by Kaethe Kollwitz, Saatfrikhte sollen nicht vermahlen werden, recently acquired for the print collection. Below: Briefcase and other personal possessions of the late Adlai E. Stevenson, used by him when he was the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, °ift of Mrs. Ernest L. Ives.
Of architectural interest is the generous gift of Bruce and Calderon Howe of several mantels, stair rails, doors, and other elements from their now dismantled H Street, NW., house in Washington. Mrs. Van Horn Ely gave two fine side chairs made in New York, ca. 1830. An example of frontier folk life is a chair made about 1870 on a ranch in Mendocino, California, the gift of Mr. and Mrs. Eaton L. Grimes. An inevitable phase of 19th-century life was a horse-drawn hearse; a good example was given jointly by the Litchfield Historical Society and the Torrington Historical Society, both of Connecticut. Some fifty pieces of American furniture, dating from the third quarter of the 19th century, have been acquired for the offices and conference rooms of the original Smithsonian Institution building, designed by James Renwick. The principal rooms will gradually be furnished with ma- terial reflecting the early decades of the building's use and the Institu- tion's growth.
Significant association objects acquired during the past year, include a sack suit worn by Dwight D. Eisenhower during his term as President, and other personal items, gifts from General Eisenhower. The First Ladies collection was enriched by a sequined ball gown and wrap worn by Mrs. Warren G. Harding. A briefcase and personal items of Adlai Stevenson, used during his tenure as Ambassador to the United Nations, were the gifts of Mrs. Ernest L. Ives, his sister. Among the additions to the collections of political Americana were a banner representing the candidates Polk and Dallas from the campaign of 1844, a gift of Robert Cochran, and a portrait of Henry Clay by J. W. Dodge, painted in 1843, the gift of Mrs. Randolph Kidder.
A large number of foreign banks and financial institutions, repre- senting more than 40 countries, contributed to the growth of the numismatic collections. Many additions of ancient coins, mainly Greek bronzes, came from Mr. Harvey Stack and from Mr. and Mrs. Mortimer Neinken, who also donated a comprehensive collection of paper currencies of the Austrian Empire. The series of medieval coins was increased through donations received from Mrs. Milton Holmes. Remarkable additions were received in the field of United States paper currencies, among them an extremely rare 3-penny note issued by the Colony of Massachusetts in 1722, given by B. M. Douglas, and a unique $10,000 United States Treasury Note (1862) donated by Grover Criswell. An historically significant group of designs and engravings by Christian Gobrecht, one of the foremost United States Mint engravers of the first half of the 19th century, was received from Max J. Humbert, James Harper, Frank Darner, and Clark A. Keyser. The collections of foreign medals were increased particularly by 302 Latin-American medals and tokens contributed by the Hon. and Mrs. R. Henry Norweb.
A rare Colt Texas Patterson revolver was received from Charles M. Williams, and a rare and unusual engraved powder horn of the period of the French and Indian War was received from Lewis Allen. General Nathan Twining, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, pre- sented his entire collection of uniforms, including a unique dress uni- form designed by himself. A large collection of interesting Civil War material, including a number of rare specimens, was acquired as a gift from Mrs. Florence Wieland.
A special exhibit of the Atlas ground guidance computer Mod I, planned by associate curator Uta Merzbach, was opened in the hall of physical sciences and will be on display through the first half of 1967. The Burroughs Corporation, manufacturers of the computer, assisted in making it operational, and daily lecture-demonstrations are being given by museum technicians George A. Norton and Charles E. Dennison. The exhibit includes a film of the computer at work guiding rockets from Cape Kennedy. Dr. Merzbach also prepared a special exhibit of ruling and dividing engines for the American Optical Society meeting, and this will continue to be on view throughout the year in the special exhibits area of the hall of physical sciences. The exhibit features equipment by Nobert, Fasoldt, Rogers, Rutherfurd, and Row- land, to complement the classic machines by Ramsden and Michelson on display in the permanent exhibit.
To test the feasibility of exhibits for the blind, curator Grace R. Cooper selected objects from the reference collections that would best illustrate the textile subjects to be discussed in two half-hour sessions. These included the basic fibers cotton, wool, flax, silk, and man-made fibers, and the basic processes of ginning, carding, spinning, and weaving. A 4-harness loom with examples of plain, patterned, bro- caded, tapestry, and related fabrics was provided, and three docents were trained to conduct sightless persons on tours of the exhibit. This special project was run in conjunction with a NASA exhibit on the history of flight, also designed for the blind, and together they gave experience of great value to the division of vocational guidance, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, which had supported the project with a grant. The weekly weaving demonstrations, dis- continued to permit restoration of the wood frame of the loom, were replaced by weekly demonstrations of handspinning by associate cura- tor Rita Adrosko and museum technician Lois Vann. Miss Adrosko also explained the art of handspinning on TV Channel 26 in Window on Our World, an educational program designed for Metropolitan Washington school children. A temporary exhibit of Victorian Needle- work is being prepared for initial showing in the Museum, after which it will be circulated by the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibi- tion Service.
A special security case for historic jewelry placed in the hall of American costume, holds the Napoleon necklace, Marie-Antoinette earrings, and Empress Eugenie blue diamond, all presented by Mrs. Merriweather Post, as well as fine jewels of the 20th century, including important examples made by Harry Winston.
Two major installations were completed for permanent exhibits in the growth of the United States halls being designed by Mrs. Deborah Bretzfelder: the wheels and gearing from a 1774 grist mill in Chester County, Pennsylvania, and a house frame from Ipswich, Massachusetts, dating from the 1690s and the 1750s.
Goddard, Mrs. Robert H.: Bronze reproduction of Daniel Guggenheim Medal awarded to Dr. Robert H. Goddard (NAM 1671).
Aviation Museum Nye, Willis L. Page, George Jr. Page, Mrs. Stanley Peasley, Jesse C. Robischon, E. W. Sanger-Bredt, Frau Dr. Irene Sayler, James Shaw, Winthrop Shepard, Alan B. Jr. Shepard, Morton B. Smith, W. E.
U.S. Navy, Office of Aviation History Vaeth, J. Gordon Van Dresser, Peter Van Hoorebeeck, A. Van Zandt, J. Parker Velkas, C. Frank Western Airlines Westland Aircraft Limited Wigton, D.C. Wright, Mrs. Burdette
A great loss to the Freer Gallery was the death of Miss Katharine N. Rhoades in New York on October 26th. Associated with the Gallery from its beginning, she had been a close personal friend of the founder, Charles Lang Freer, and had been instrumental in helping with the cataloging of the collection. She was mentioned by Mr. Freer in his will as a friend and advisor of the gallery and continued in active service as honorary consultant until the time of her death.
The Gallery regretfully accepted the resignation, July 1, 1965, of Dr. James F. Cahill, curator of Chinese art, who is now with the University of California at Berkeley. Dr. Cahill had first come to the Gallery as a Hackney Scholar (American Oriental Society) in 1950 and studied in that capacity for approximately one year. In 1956 he returned as a Freer Fellow from the University of Michigan for another year, at the end of which time he became a regular staff member.
The end of 1965 saw the retirement of Mrs. Lnor O. West, adminis- trative assistant, after 20 years of service with the Freer. In June Mrs. Constance B. Olsen resigned as librarian, and her place has been filled by Mrs. Priscilla P. Smith. Mr. William Thomas Chase III, assistant in the technical laboratory, resigned temporarily to return to the Gallery in the fall of 1966. His place was filled for the summer by Mrs. Meryl Johnson, chemist, from the University of Michigan.
Two volunteer summer interns served during the summer of 1965: Miss Barbara Bernhard (Oberlin College) and Miss Susan Lyles (Mary Baldwin College). Miss Masako Saito of the Conservation Center, Institute of Fine Arts, New York University, returned for another period of three weeks to study Mr. Sugiura's methods of restoring and mounting Oriental paintings. Miss Priscilla Parsons completed several months of study during the summer of 1965 in the Near Eastern field under a grant from New York University. In October, Mrs. Ellen Johnston Laing of the University of Michigan came to the Gallery as a Freer Fellow to do research in the field of Chinese art in preparation of her doctoral thesis. In January and February of 1 966, Miss Thea Comins, a student at Bennington College, worked for Dr. Ettinghausen under the Smithsonian Institution's academic year research assistance program. On May 12, 1966, Miss Vicki Weinstein reported for duty as a Hackney Scholar from Cornell University; and in June, Miss Mary Watkins (Mount Holyoke College) and Miss Susan Frankel (Cornell University) reported for duty as summer interns.
Care of the works of art was shared by several of the staff members. The technical laboratory examined, cleaned and/or repaired, as necessary, a total of 27 objects and made 75 identifications by X-ray diffraction analysis, etc.; in addition, 48 objects were examined which were either contemplated for purchase or had been submitted for authentication by other museums or private owners. Ben B. Johnson, consultant on conservation work, under contract to the Gallery, examined and worked on 61 oil paintings in the American collections. Takashi Sugiura, with the help of two trainees (his daughter Kumi and Makoto Souta, who has been brought from Japan to serve his apprenticeship under Mr. Sugiura), cleaned, retouched and remounted a total of 19 Chinese and Japanese paintings. Illustrator Frank A. Haentschke rematted 43 Arabic, Indian and Persian paintings.
Oriental civilizations as reflected in their arts." The presentation was made by Secretary Ripley, and Dr. Pope spoke on the career of Professor Yashiro, one of the world's outstanding specialists in the arts of the Far East and also an authority on the Italian painter Sandro Botticelli and his school. The recipient in his speech of acceptance commented on Mr. Freer and American pioneer collectors in the field of Oriental art. In particular, he stressed Mr. Freer's early association with Japan. Professor Yashiro's address was followed by a reception. The series of illustrated lectures was continued as follows:
In November 1965, the staff was augmented by the "detail" to the NCFA of the International Art Section of the USIA, under the super- vision of Miss Lois Bingham. The NCFA assumed responsibility for U.S. representation in the international art exhibits at Sao Paulo and Venice with the conviction that it must demonstrate our country's concern for cultural values and its continuing major achievements in the arts.
Recommendations were made for the reappointment of Wilmarth S. Lewis, Henry P. Mcllhenny, Paul Mellon and Ogden M. Pleissner for the usual 4-year term. The following officers were re-elected: Edgar P. Richardson, Chairman; Gilmore D. Clarke, Vice-Chairman; and S. Dillon Ripley, Secretary. The following were re-elected to the Execu- tive Committee: David E. Finley, Chairman, Mr. Clarke, Mr. Pleissner, Mr. Mcllhenny, Mr. Richardson (ex officio) and Mr. Ripley (ex officio).
The death of Paul Manship on January 30, 1966, ended this great artist's long and fruitful association with the National Collection and the Smithsonian. Mr. Manship had been a member of the Smithsonian Art Commission since 1931, serving as Chairman from 1944 to 1964. To this service, he brought great warmth and goodwill and he donated to the Collection many excellent examples of his work. By the terms of
Important individual works received included a painting, Cotopaxi, dated 1855, by the Hudson Piver painter Frederic Edwin Church, given by Mrs. Frank R. McCoy; The Hills, by Preston Dickinson, given by Mrs. Robert F. Shawan; Phenomena Off From Shore, by Paul Jenkins, given by the artist; and a watercolor, Outdoor Cafe, by Maurice Prendergast, given by Dr. R. A. Kling.
A total of 1 ,900 works were loaned to the NCFA by 1 1 7 lenders. These included 543 weather vane molds loaned by Mrs. Edith Halpert, and 1 70 20th-century paintings and drawings loaned by Mr. Olin Dows. Of the 1 ,900 works, 1 ,030 were for lending programs, including items for display in the White House.
Additions to the library, a facility which in the new building will be shared with the National Portrait Gallery, have come by the exchange distribution of catalogs issued by the NCFA and by gifts. Of the many received since July 1 965, only a few of the donors can be men- tioned here: Mr. Richard Dannenberg, Director of the American Contemporary Art Gallery, New York; Mrs. Daphne Foskett, Edin- burgh, Scotland; Mr. David C. Huntington, of Olana Preservation, Inc., New York; Mr. Alexander Ince, New York; the Freer Gallery Library; Mr. Andrew Oliver, New York; the Embassy of the Ruman- ian People's Republic, Washington, D.C. ; Mrs. John Sloan and Mr. Charles Nagel, Washington, D.C.
Important collections of books and papers were also received from the American Federation of Arts, New York; the Bollingen Foundation, New York; the Corcoran Gallery, Washington; Mrs. Anthony de Francisci, New York; Mrs. Edith Halpert, New York; the Martha Jackson Gallery, New York; Mrs. Haven Parker, Boston; the Tate Gallery, London; and others. The NCFA is grateful for this very necessary support of the library collections.
In connection with this exhibition, a series of six lectures on U. S. parks was given by officials of the National Park Service. Ancient Art From Afghanistan — Treasures of the Kabul Museum (June 30 through August 23, 1966). Opportunity to exhibit antiquities of high aesthetic quality and from a little known culture is rare. The NCFA was fortunate to be one of the three museums permitted to offer this exceptional artistic event in America. In conjunction with the exhibition, M. Karim Barakzai of the Kabul Museum spent several weeks in Washington as guest curator. Rugs of Afghanistan (June 30 through July 31, 1966). This exhibition of 34 examples of weaving by the nomadic tribes of Afghanistan presented as a complement to the showing of the ancient treasures of that country, was arranged through the courtesy of Mr. H. McCoy Jones.
The Art-in-the-Embassies Program continues to grow under the supervision of Mrs. Nancy P. Kefauver, and the NCFA serves as a repository for the over 1,376 works of art involved. These works are registered and cared for in new storage facilities and shipped by the State Department to American Embassies in all parts of the world.
Paul Wayland Bartlett (1865-1925), a portrait by Charles Sprague Pearce, came as a gift from Mrs. Armistead Peter, Jr. It shows Bartlett, a Yankee born but trained as an artist in France, in full profile and in the costume of the turn of the century. Among many other works he is responsible for the sculptured pediments of the House of Representa- tives. Bartlett was a handsome man and as a successful artist could not help but know it. All this is honestly shown with such faithfulness and conviction by his slightly older contemporary Charles Pearce that it is one of the most popular portraits in the collection. It is a transfer from NCFA.
Mary Baker Eddy (1821-1910) by Luella V. Serrao. This fine marble bust of the founder of the Christian Science Church was pre- sented as a gift to the Gallery in May 1966 from Mrs. Frances Thompson Hill and Calvin C. Hill on the occasion of the hundredth anniversary of the founding of the church.
Julia Ward Howe (1819-1910), a portrait by her son-in-law John Elliott, was the gift of Mrs. John Elliott and was a transfer from NCFA. It is of unusual interest as it shows Mrs. Howe as the young woman who was inspired to write the "Battle Hymn of the Republic" for which she received $4 from the Atlantic Monthly and the undying devotion of her fellow Americans.
Julia Ward Howe (1819-1910), by her son-in-law John Elliott. Gift Mrs. John Elliott (transfer from National Collection of Fine Arts).
Mary Baker Eddy (1821-1910), by Luella V. Serrao. Gift of Mrs. Frances Thompson Hill, who stands beside the bust.
He also worked with the architects, Faulkner, Stenhouse, Fryer, and Faulkner and with Mr. Victor Proetz on the remodelling and fur- nishing of the NPG quarters in the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries building, and represented the Smithsonian Institution at various meetings related to the International Cooperation Year.
Mr. Stewart arranged the Gallery's first exhibition "Nucleus for a National Collection,'"opened in the Arts and Industries building for the Bicentennial of James Smithson's birth. This exhibition of 65 portraits by 52 artists in painting, engraving, drawing, sculpture, and photography, represented a cross section of the various media in the collection. A catalogue of the exhibition, Nucleus for a National Collec- tion (Washington: Smithsonian Institution, publ. 4653, 1966, unpaged [30 pp.], illus.), was compiled by Mr. Stewart.
Under the direction of Mrs. Genevieve A. Kennedy a program has been instituted to photograph for the gallery's archival file all portraits on loan or brought in for study. To date 200 black and white photo- graphs and 46 color transparencies have been made. The print collection of some 21,287 pieces has been alphabetized and biograph- ically identified by Mrs. Kennedy, who was greatly assisted in this work by student aides Richard L. Tyner and Joyce A. Keener.
Librarian William Walker worked diligently with Dr. Reed in building up the library, which in its new quarters will serve both the
Mrs. Armistead Peter Jr. Museum fund Bernard M. Baruch Museum fund Anonymous Donor Janet Gregg Wallace H. K. Bush-Brown Robert C. Vose Jr. Museum fund The George Washington
MacCameron Dorothy B. Webb Unknov/n Mrs. Mabel Wiles Anonymous Donor Anonymous Donor Bryant Baker Anonymous Donor
The National Gallery of Art, although technically established as a bureau of the Smithsonian Institution, is an autonomous and separately administered organization and is governed by its own Board of Trustees. The statutory members of such Board of Trustees are the Chief Justice of the United States, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treas- ury, and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, ex officio. The four General Trustees continuing in office during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1 966, were Paul Mellon, John Hay Whitney, Dr. Franklin D. Murphy, and Lessing J. Rosenwald. On May 5, 1966, Paul Mellon was reelected by the Board of Trustees to serve as President of the Gallery, and John Hay Whitney was reelected Vice President.
In the fiscal year 1966 gifts of money were made by the Avalon Foundation, Frelinghuysen Foundation, J. I. Foundation, Samuel H. Kress Foundation, Old Dominion Foundation, Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer Foundation, Lila Acheson Wallace Fund, Inc., and Mr. Paul Mellon.
Mrs. Ailsa Mellon Bruce contributed additional money and securities for the purchase of works of art for the National Gallery of Art and for educational purposes related to works of art.
Mrs. Mellon Bruce. March 17 through May 1, 1966. Twenty-five Tears of National Gallery Publications. March 17 through
La Galeria National de Washington by H. Lester Cooke was published by the Aquilar Press, Madrid. Mr. Campbell wrote an introduction to a new edition of Dunlap's History of the Rise and Progress of the Arts of Design in the United States. Miss Katharine Shepard wrote two reviews for the American Journal of Archaeology. An article written by Michael Mahoney entitled "Salvator Rosa Provenance Studies: Prince Livio Odescalchi and Queen Christina" was published in Master Drawings, III, 4, 1966.
During the fiscal year 1966, the Publications Service, under the supervision of Mrs. Ruth Dundas, placed on sale seven new publica- tions: La Galeria National de Washington (in Spanish) by H. Lester Cooke; National Gallery of Art Summary Catalogue of European Paintings and Sculpture; A Pageant of Painting from the National Gallery of Art, edited by Huntington Cairns and John Walker; Dutch Landscape Painting of the 17th Century by Wolfgang Stechow; John Singleton Copley by Jules D. Prown; Renaissance Bronzes by John Pope-Hennessy; and The Smith- sonian Institution by Walter Karp.
From June through December 1 965 the program of the educational department was carried out under the direction of Dr. Raymond S. Stites, curator in charge, and his staff. On January 1, 1966, Dr. Stites became Assistant to the Director for Educational Services, and Dr. Margaret Bouton, formerly associate curator, became curator in charge of educational work. In addition to these changes, four em- ployees were transferred from the publications office to the educational department when the latter department took over responsibility for the reception desks in the lobbies.
The Office of Extension Services, under the direction of Dr. Grose Evans, circulated to the public, traveling exhibitions, films, slide lectures with texts, film strips, and other educational materials.
A total of 2,160 slide lecture sets was circulated in 6,872 bookings, an increase of 1,155 bookings over last year. Ten slide sets are now being circulated with records, and Dr. Evans prepared a new slide lecture "Painting in Georgian England" based on paintings in the collection of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon. Two hundred copies will be circulated by the Extension Services.
In an effort to increase the circulation of the Extension Services materials and to keep abreast of new developments in the audio-visual field, Dr. Evans and his assistants traveled to various states attending 12 meetings and conventions, at which examples of the Extension Services materials were exhibited.
Dr. Evans also assisted in the organization of a pilot research teachers training program to be conducted at the National Gallery of Art by the George Washington University. Forty teachers chosen by the Uni- versity from applications received form all parts of the country will be given a 6-week program from July 5 to August 12, 1966.
Under the supervision of Dr. Grose Evans, the Index of American Design, circulated 31 traveling exhibitions for 65 showings in 21 states and one foreign country. The Index also circulated 135 sets of color slides throughout the United States, and 432 photographs of Index subjects were used for exhibits, study, and publication. The photographic file was increased by 102 negatives and 328 prints; 14 permits were issued to persons wishing to reproduce 254 subjects. The Index material was used by 304 persons, for the purpose of securing slides, exhibits, doing special research and design, and gathering illustrations for publications.
Under the supervision of Richard H. Bales, assistant to the director in charge of music, the program continued and forty concerts were given during the fiscal year in the East Garden Court. Thirty-nine of these concerts were played on Sunday evenings and one on Thursday evening. The latter was played during the 25th Anniversary celebra- tion of the National Gallery of Art. Thirty-two of these Sunday con- certs were made possible by funds bequeathed to the National Gallery of Art by Mr. William Nelson Cromwell; the 23rd American Music Festival of seven concerts between May 1 and June 12, 1966, was sponsored by the J. I. Foundation. The Gallery orchestra, conducted by Mr. Bales, played 12 concerts. Two of these orchestra programs were supported in part by a grant from the Music Performance Trust Fund of the American Recording Industry.
Intermission talks during the Sunday evening broadcasts featured members of the staff of the educational department speaking on various art topics, and there were occasional interviews with guest lecturers. Mr. Bales gave program notes during the intermissions of these broad- casts.
Mr. Bales was in residence at the University of Rochester during July and early August 1965, and conducted concerts and lectured on conducting at the Eastman School of Music. He received the first Distinguished Service Award from the Sons of Confederate Veterans in recognition of his work in Civil War music.
Two one-hour television programs by the National Gallery orchestra with Mr. Bales conducting were taped by WTOP-TV, and these with a previously taped program were telecast during the fiscal year. Paintings from the National Gallery of Art collection were shown during these concerts. In September 1965 a previous telecast by the National Gallery of Art orchestra won a local "Emmy" award.
Mr. Bales appeared several times as a guest conductor and lecturer; a number of his compositions and arrangements were performed by other orchestras.
During May the National Gallery concerts and Mr. Bales received their fourth award from the American Association of University Women for a cultural contribution to the community through their television concerts.
During April 1 966 Mr. Bales served as Chairman of the Instrumental Music Panel of the Arts Advisory Committee of the District of Columbia Recreation Board.
In commemoration of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the National Gallery of Art, twenty-five medals were struck and awarded "For Distinguished Service to Education in Art." The recepients were flown to Washington for the Twenty-fifth Anniversary celebrations and were awarded the medals by Mrs. Johnson in the East Room of the White House on March 17. The obverse of the medal was designed by the sculptor and graphic artist, Leonard Baskin, and the reverse by the calligrapher and stone-carver, John Everett Benson. The recepients of the medals also received a cash honorarium.
President Johnson reluctantly accepted the resignation of Mr. Ernest R. Breech as Trustee on March 17, 1966.
The General Services Administration is the Center's agent for design and construction and will continue in this capacity through the con- struction phase. A special liaison committee, made up of five Trustees and representatives of GSA and the architect will be responsible for the final plans and specifications on all phases of construction. The Trustee members of this committee are Chairman Stevens, Mrs. Jouett Shouse, S. Dillon Ripley, George B. Hartzog, Jr., and Ralph E. Becker. The Director of Engineering will join the Administrative Officer as an ex officio member of the committee.
On June 23, it was announced that Leonard Bernstein, the eminent and versatile composer and music director of the New York Phil- harmonic Orchestra, had agreed to compose a major dramatic work for the Center's opening. Mr. Bernstein, in accepting the commission, recognized the national significance of the Center and expressed deep appreciation of the cultural interests of President Kennedy.
Representing the Center's Board of Trustees on the National Council are the officers and Mrs. George Garrett, Mrs. Albert Lasker, and Mrs. Jouett Shouse.
Mrs. Thomas W. Braden of California and Douglas Dillon of New Jersey were named co-chairman of the National Membership Drive, currently under way.
The John Philip Sousa Memorial Committee, appointed by the American Bandmasters Association, has continued its campaign for a $100,000 endowment to provide the stage and acoustical sound re- flectors in the Concert Hall. The committee reported that 71 percent of the goal has been reached and that it anticipates 100 percent success during the school term beginning in September. The stage will be named in honor of Mr. Sousa.
Final plans for the Center, on which construction bids were received, required expert assistance in many areas. In addition to the resources of Edward Durell Stone, architect and his associates, the following were engineering consultants to the architect: Syska & Hennessy, Inc., mechanical and electrical engineers; Meuser, Rutledge, Wentworth and Johnston, foundation engineers; Donald Oenslager, Mr. Stone's stage-design consultant; Abe Feder, lighting consultant; Ben Schlanger, seating consultant; and Olaf Soot, stage machinery consultant. Dr. Cyril Harris, acoustics consultant, designed the Center's acoustical systems. Edward D. Stone, Jr., is landscape architect and Sasaki, Walker, and Associates serve as landscape consultants.
Numerous members of the staff of the Public Buildings Service of the General Services Administration have participated in the design de- velopment of the John F. Kennedy Center. Among them special recognition is appropriate for Karel Yasko, Assistant Commissioner for Design; L. Anthony Ziernicki, Assistant Commissioner for Construc- tion; J. Rowland Snyder, Director, Architectural Division; Robert R. Jones, Director, Mechanical and Electrical Division; Arthur Westrich, Director, Structural Division; James Francis, Director, Specifications Division; James H. Jones, Project Coordinator; Ray Whitley, Chief, Elevator Branch; Harry Kay, Estimator, Estimates Division; Edward Kearney, Chief, Electrical Estimates Branch. Dr. Vern O. Knudsen reviewed the Center's acoustical design.
Simplified and reduced forms for statistics have been prepared for use during the coming fiscal year. In October, Miss Clarice M. Barker, who had been acting chief of the catalog section since December 1964 and serials cataloger for the library since July 1960, retired.
Mrs. Gloria A. Mauney returned to the library after a year's absence to take charge of the entomology library. A systematic review of all serials in this collection is underway.
During the past year, efforts have continued to develop a strong facility to serve the National Collection of Fine Arts, while radically expanding that aspect of the work supporting the National Portrait Gallery, in anticipation of the move to the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries building (the renovated Old Patent Office building) next year. William Walker, the branch librarian, is engaged in a project with the Library of Congress subject cataloging division, to revise the Library of Congress "N" classification schedule for books on fine arts. In January Miss Ruth Carlson joined the staff as senior cataloger for fine arts.
At the December meeting of the Society of Systematic Zoology in Berkeley, California, an informal paper "Data Processing, the Natural History Library and the Future," by Mary A. Huffer and Jean Chan- dler Smith was presented by Mrs. Huffer.
On April 27th the Federal Library Committee invited the Smith- sonian to fill a vacancy in its membership for an unexpired term of two years ending June 1967. The Acting Director of Smithsonian Institu- tion Libraries was designated to represent the Institution on the Com- mittee. Mrs. Huffer also continued to work with the Federal Library Committee Task Force on Acquisitions of Library Materials and Correlation of Federal Library Procedures.
In December 1965, after 47 yeai s of service to the Institution, Anthony W. Wilding retired as chief of the supply division and in March 1966, Fred G. Barwick was appointed chief. Mr. Barwick had previously been a contract specialist with the Bureau of Ships, Department of the Navy.
Dominica Project. Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Campbell: Gift to the Zoo Animal Fund. Coca-Cola Company : Gift to the division of medical sciences. Conservation Foundation: Grant to support Conference on Avifauna of North- ern Latin America. Joanne T. Cummings : Gift for the purpose of acquiring ceramics and glass. Charles Darwin Foundation : Gift for the support of research and conservation in
Department of the Interior: Grants for support of research entitled Indexing Vocabulary for Publication by the Office of Water Resources Research and Sorting of Plankton Samples from Geronimo; and to provide services to sub-sample plankton samples from the International Indian Ocean Expedition. Additional grants for the support of research entitled Tropical Fishes and Con- tinuation of a Review of the General and American Species of the Shrimp Family Penaeidae; also for the purpose in the preparation of camera-ready copy of research data suitable for photocopying and printing as a current Water Resources Research Catalog. Department of State: Grant for Mr. Joseph F. K. Acquaye, assistant curator
Connor Miss Edith Newman Cook Mr. Gardner Cowles Crown-Zellerbach Foundation Mrs. Gertrude d'Amecourt The Honorable and Mrs. C. Douglas
Dillon Miss Barbara Donald Mr. and Mrs. Robert B. Eichholz Mr. Milton Elsberg Dr. and Mrs. Richard Ettinghausen Mr. and Mrs. David E. Finley
Frelinghuysen Mr. and Mrs. B. H. Friedman Mrs. J. William Fullbright Mr. Richard E. Fuller Mr. Wreathan E. Gathright Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Geldzahler Mr. Ira Gershwin Mr. Roland Gibson Mr. and Mrs. Mackensie Gordon Mrs. Philip L. Graham Miss Jacqueline Greber Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Hahn, Jr. Mrs. W. Averill Harriman Mr. E. David Harrison Mr. and Mrs. John Hechinger Mr. Henry H. Hecht, Jr. Mr. Ernest Hillman, Jr. Mr. Barnet Hodes Mrs. Arthur U. Hooper Mr. and Mrs. David Jay Hyman Dr. and Mrs. John M. Ide I. F. A. Galleries, Inc. Industrial Union Department AFL-CIO Dr. H. W. Janson Mr. and Mrs. Maxey Jarman The Honorable Jacob K. Javits Mrs. J. Lee Johnson, III Captain and Mrs. Francois C. B.
McNamara Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon Mr. and Mrs. Cord Meyer, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Robert E. MeyerhofF Mrs. Paul Moore The Honorable and Mrs. William S.
Moorhead Mr. and Mrs. Edward P. Morgan Philip Morris International Mr. Charles Nagel Mrs. David Halle Mr. and Mrs. Roy R. Neuberger Mr. Gerson Nordlinger, Jr. Miss Anna Belle O'Brien Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Ottenstein Mr. and Mrs. Maxwell Oxman Mrs. Tompkins Parker Mr. Robert E. Phinney, Jr. Mr. Abe Pollin Mrs. S. Prentice Porter Mrs. Merriweather Post Mr. Gustave Ring Mr. Laurance S. Rockefeller
Whitfield J. Bell, Jr. Association Librarian, American Philo- sophical Society, 105 South Fifth Street, Philadelphia, Penn- sylvania. Born 1914. A.B. Dickinson College, Ph. D. University of Pennsylvania, 1947. Associated with Dickinson College 1937-1954; assistant and then associate editor of the Papers of Benjamin Franklin 1954-1961; and from 1961 Association Librarian of APS. Editor of Bibliography of the History of Medicine in the U.S. and Canada (1948-1953) and Mr. Franklin (with L. W. Labaree) (1956). Author of Needs and Opportunities for Research in the History of Early American Science ( 1 955) .
Mrs. Mabel A. Byrd Richard B. Woodbury, Chairman T. Dale Stewart, Senior Scientist Waldo R. Wedel, Senior Scientist John C. Ewers, Senior Scientist Henry B. Collins, Senior Scientist Mrs. M. Blaker, Archivist Joseph Andrews, Exhibit Specialist Saul H. Riesenberg, Curator in Charge Gordon D. Gibson, Associate Curator
Curator Mrs. Anne W. Murray, Associate Curator Herbert R. Collins, Assistant Curator Mrs. Claudia B. Kidwell, Assistant Curator C. Malcolm Watkins, Curator Richard E. Ahlborn, Associate Curator John T. Fesperman, Jr., Concert Director Mrs. Cynthia A. Hoover, Associate Curator Rodris C. Roth, Associate Curator Carl H. Scheele, Associate Curator in Charge Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli, Curator Mrs. Elvira Clain-Stefanelli, Associate
Mrs. Genevieve A. Kennedy, Museum Special- ist Mrs. Marcia Simon, Research Assistant Mrs. Pamela Christoffel, Research Assistant Lewis T. McInnis, Museum Technician John Nicholas Brown, Chairman, Catherine Drinker Bowen, Julian P. Boyd, Lewis Deschler, David E. Finley, Edgar P. Richardson, Wilmarth Sheldon Lewis, Richard H. Shryock, Col. Frederick P. Todd Chief Justice of the United States Secretary, Smithsonian Institution Director, National Gallery of Art
Willard W. Becklund (Helminthology), J. Bruce Bredin (Biology), Maybelle H. Chitwood (Worms), Ailsa M. Clark (Marine Invertebrates), Elisabeth Deich- mann (Echinoderms), Waldo L. Schmitt (Marine Invertebrates), Frank R. Schwen- gel (Mollusks), Gilbert L. Voss (Mollusks), Mrs. Mildred Stratton Wilson (Copepod Crustacea)
Mrs. Arthur M. Greenwood (Cultural History), Elmer C. Herber (History), Ivor Noel Hume (Cultural History), Fred W. McKay (Numismatics), Mrs. Emery May Norweb (Numismatics), R. Henry Norweb (Numismatics), Mrs. Joan Pear- son Watkins (Cultural History)
In fact, sociologists labor under the disadvantage of being somewhat luxated; are they scientists or are they humanists? It is a symbol of the age that they should feel thus dislocated. It is of course unnecessary. Similarly, some thoughtful biologists tend today to feel slightly uncomfortable about being scientists. Science in the public mind has come to be associated almost exclusively with the physical sciences or with medicine. Scien- tists are white-coated men, either possessed of a Batman-like syndrome, about to fly off into space, or else all-knowing, wise versions of Dr. Kildare. In any case, biologists who have to do
Another important experiment in education is that of an exhibit for the blind, or, as the term is, sightless persons. With the aid of a planning grant from the Vocational Rehabilitation Administration, Mr. Blitzer has been working with Dr. Brian
As Professor Derek Price has recently stated, in the field of the history of science the Institution is preeminent for its re- sources in objects and in skilled research staff. Among its greatest treasures is a notable collection of letters and manuscripts of Joseph Henry, who was selected by the National Historical Publications Commission of the National Archives as the first scientist whose papers should be published under national auspices. It is appropriate, therefore, that the Smithsonian, in happy conjunction with the American Philosophical Society and the National Academy of Sciences, should have determined to publish the papers of Joseph Henry. Aided by a vital grant from the National Science Foundation, this project has now commenced under the editorship of Dr. Nathan Reingold. A guiding committee of associated specialists has been formed. In this connection, it has also been heartening to observe the progress made by the Institution's talented archivist Samuel T. Suratt in developing our manuscript collections for use by historical scholars.
Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd (below, left) and Mrs. George H. Mahon, wife of the Smithsonian Regent, and acting Secretary James Bradley (fourth left) chat with Bill Suitor of Bell Aerosystems Company, who demon- strated (above) a rocket belt on the Mall, April 1, 1967, during the Pageant marking the establishment of the new Department of Transportation.
The Smithsonian Council assembled twice, in October and again in March, for discussions with the Secretary and members of the professional staff. Dr. Ralph E. Alston, one of the initial Council members from the University of Texas, died February 17, 1967. Jan LaRue, Professor of Music at the Graudate School of Arts and Sciences of New York University, and Elting Morison, Acting Master of Ezra Stiles College at Yale Univer- sity, joined the Council during the year.
At the second meeting there was further discussion of the Smithsonian libraries and of the proposal for a union catalog serving all Washington libraries. The Council heard reports from Eugene Wallen on Smithsonian oceanographic activities and from Peter Farb, designer of the hall of insects for the Museum of Natural History. Frank Taylor presented a report on recent experiments in museum practices and the organiza- tional changes indicated by a modernized exhibits program. At the dinner concluding the meetings, Mrs. Adelyn Breeskin, our distinguished consultant in modern art and education, spoke on the present role of our galleries and museums in fostering an appreciation of art.
The Bill (H. R. 6125) authorizing the construction of a new Air and Space Museum building on the Mall was signed by President Johnson on July 19, 1966. This legislation expanded the name officially to National Air and Space Museum and, among other provisions, also expanded the membership of the Museum's Advisory Board to include all Federal and Defense Agencies dealing with aerospace activities. During the year the President appointed an additional civilian member, Mr. James Wilmot of Syracuse, New York.
A number of nationally important aerospace award cere- monies were held in the Smithsonian during the year. These included two presentations of the Robert J. Collier Trophy; the 1965 award to the late Dr. Hugh Dryden and Mr. James E. Webb, and the 1966 award to James McDonnell. The Smith- sonian's own Langley Medal was presented to Dr. Wernher von Braun on June 6, 1967.
In this year the Joseph H. Hirshhorn collection has formally come under the aegis of the Institution. A site on the Mall for this unique new museum and sculpture garden has already been authorized by Congress; the architect, Gordon Bunshaft, is at work; and funds for operation have already been appropriated by the Congress. Abram Lerner has been appointed Director of the new gallery and has continued his busy role as curator of the collection in preparing materials for loan, one of which, a collection of 53 pieces of sculpture, is currently on exhibition at Dartmouth College (see Sculpture in Our Century; selections from the Joseph H. Hirshhorn collection, 1967, Hopkins Center, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire). Mr. Hirshhorn is continually adding important works to the collection. Since the formal presentation of the collection to the United States, an abbreviated list of acquisitions includes works by Cassatt, Cornell, Stuart Davis, Ernst, Falguiere, Fontana, Sam Francis, George Grosz, Ipousteguy, Zoltan Kemeny, Moore, Nadelman, Nicholson, Olitski, Picasso, Pomodoro, Rauschenberg, Rodin, Sargent, Sheeler, and Frank Stella. Mr. Hirshhorn's continued enthusiasm and personal spirit and energy know no bounds. The Nation will long have cause to remember him.
One of the great national resources of the United States is the National Herbarium, maintained in the Museum of Natural History. Since the days when it sponsored Asa Gray's classic Synoptical Flora of North America, the Smithsonian Institution has been an important contributor to our knowledge of indige- nous plants of North America. Now it is joining in a large inter- national project that will utilize its vast collection of dried specimens and library sources in a brand new effort to survey the American flora. When the American Society of Plant Taxono- mists on August 14, 1966, decided to organize the "Flora North America Project," Stanwyn G. Shetler was named executive secretary, and the Smithsonian Institution agreed to serve as headquarters for the Secretariat. In his new capacity, Mr. Shetler has spent considerable time during the year laying groundwork for the project. In January 1967 the first meeting of the nine-man editorial committee was held in the department of botany to establish the framework of the project and to appraise its financial and manpower requirements. The project, which is being sponsored and managed by the American Institute of Biological Sciences, will be a fifteen-year, cooperative effort by American and Canadian taxonomists to produce a four- volume manual of the 15-20 thousand native vascular plants of North America north of Mexico. In addition to the publication which will result, the project is expected to result in the training of many new taxonomists and to attract many potential young students in the field. With the completed Flora U.S.S.R. for the Soviet Union and the developing Flora Europeae, which together will cover all of Eurasia, this new North American treatise will fill the last gap in our knowledge of Boreal and Arctic floras of the world.
Under the direction of Dr. Handley, two field groups con- tinued the work of the Smithsonian Venezuelan Project in the eastern and southern part of that country. They collected mammals, their ectoparasites, blood sera, and biological and ecological data. More than twenty scientists in six countries are participating in this project with the cooperation and support of several Venezuelan scientific organizations.
Through the generosity of Mr. and Mrs. William S. Cowles, who contributed their airplane and their time as pilots, it was possible for Handley to make an aerial ecological survey of Venezuela. Covering about 10,000 miles from the air, Dr. Handley studied variations in vegetation and terrain that might affect the distribution of mammals, as a means of further refine- ment of the Venezuelan project.
Folk Festival on the Mall: Mrs. Ambrose Roanhorse, Navajo rug weaver, Window Rock, Arizona; and (below) Mr. Bea Hensley, blacksmith, Spruce Pine, North Carolina.
Folk Festival on the Mall: Mrs. Margaret Coochwytewa (far left), Hopi basketmaker, Second Mesa, Arizona; and (be- low) McGee Brothers, folk mu- sicians, Nashville, Tennessee.
This page: Mr. Herman Ben- ton, scoopmaker, Livingston Manor, New York; Mr. James Miracle, chairmaker, Middles- boro, Kentucky; and Mr. Dewey Harmon, whitder, Boone, North Carolina.
Folk Festival on the Mall: Freedom Quilting Bee, Tuscaloosa, Alabama; and (below) Mr. Norman Miller, potter, Sprott, Alabama.
Carl Fox joined the Institution as Director of the Museum Shops. During fifteen years as manager of the Brooklyn Museum sales shops, Mr. Fox became widely respected throughout the museum field for the excellence of his sales exhibitions. More recently he served as inter- national art curator for Hallmark, Inc.
The Secretary appointed Abram Lerner to be the first Director of the Joseph H. Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden. Mr. Lerner has been the curator of the Hirshhorn collection for ten years and earlier he was associate director concurrently for two New York City museums : The American Contemporary Arts Gallery and the Artist's Gallery.
Dr. Donald Menzel, retiring Director of the Harvard Observatory, recently joined the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory as a senior physicist. The Observatory gained the services of another senior physicist, Dr. Winfield W. Salisbury from the Varo Manufacturing Company, Garland, Texas, who will work on applications of advanced electronic techniques to astrophysical problems.
Dr. Brian Mason, after serving for twelve years as the chairman of the department of mineralogy at the American Museum of Natural History, joined the Museum of Natural History as research curator in the division of meteorites, in the department of mineral sciences.
Mrs. Helen L. Hayes has joined the Assistant Secretary (Science) to serve as his special assistant. Before coming to the Smithsonian, Mrs. Hayes was Head of the Oceanographic Biological Program in the Office of Naval Research.
Three members of the staff who left the Institution for professional advancement last year should be mentioned. Dr. William L. Stern, chairman of the department of botany, has accepted an appointment to the department of botany, University of Maryland. Peter Morse, acting curator in the division of graphic arts, has joined the Honolulu Academy of Fine Arts. In September 1966, G. Carroll Lindsay left the Institution after serving for four years as the Director of Museum Services and more recently as Executive Secretary of the Smithsonian Associates. He has become the Director of Museum Services for the New York State Museum.
Several gifts and grants have helped greatly in the development of the CBCFB during FY 1967. Poplar Island (about 70 acres) was given to the Smithsonian Institution by Dr. William L. Elkins, a physician from Philadelphia. This island harbors one of the few large rookeries of great blue herons on Chesapeake Bay and nearly two dozen pairs of ospreys. The land acquisition program was facilitated by generous grants from the Research Corporation and the Max C. Fleischmann Foundation. The Old Dominion Foundation provided a highly important grant for initial laboratory facilities, living quarters, equipment, and other basic requirements of the Center. At this early stage of development all this assistance is particularly meaningful.
The office of oceanography and limnology, which provides co- ordination and assistance to scientists of the Smithsonian in their diverse studies of organisms and sediments of the World Ocean, was established separately within the Office of the Assistant Secretary (Science) in June 1966. Dr. William I. Aron was appointed Deputy Head in March 1967.
The Coast and Geodetic Survey vessel Oceanographer is on an around- the-world cruise endorsed by the President. At the urging of the National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Develop- ment, arrangements have been made for Richard Pieper (former General Motors associate of Dr. Aron) and Conrad E. Mahnken and Jack W. Jossi of the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries Laboratory in Miami to join the ship in Bombay and make comparative collections using the Hardy Plankton Recorder, the Indian Ocean Expedition Net, and the Tropical Atlantic Expedition Net. R. Glover of Edinburgh will process the Hardy samples in his Laboratory.
Support through the Smithsonian from the Vetlesen Foundation enabled Miss Julie Booth to spend the last 18 months on Fairfax Island of the Barrier Reef, off Australia. Miss Booth has assembled photo- graphs, notes on behavior, paintings, and specimens, most of which will come to the Smithsonian Institution.
Representatives of the Smithsonian Institution met with Tunisian government officials in late 1965 and mid- 1966, and with the assistance of the Embassy of the United States, an agreement to establish the Mediterranean Marine Sorting Center was signed in September 1966. The Director of the host Institut, Dr. Z. Ben Mustapha, has, since the early planning stages, provided indispensable assistance and guidance. The Institut is situated on the Gulf of Tunis, twelve kilometers north of Tunis, at the traditional site of the important and ancient seaport of Carthage.
Fishes from the Gulf of Tunis are identified by Mrs. A. Ben Alaya and S. Karaborni. Right: Vials of sorted plankton are packed by H. Zaoui and S. Karaborni for distribution to specialists.
A project to develop a manual for neotropical squamata (reported under Vertebrate Zoology, p. 105), was initiated with support provided by the office of systematics for bringing Dr. Donoso-Barros from Chile to work with James Peters.
Robert F. Fudali joined the staff at the beginning of the year and has begun studies of phase equilibria in meteorites at relatively high temperatures and under controlled oxygen fugacity, as well as diffusion studies in olivine and in iron meteorites. Rather extensive studies on recrystallization of chondrites at temperature's in the range of 700° C. to 1000° C. are also in progress in cooperation with Dr. A. Reid, University of California.
Below: The Helio Courier plane of Mr. and Mrs. William S. Cowles who piloted Handley on his 10,000-mile survey of Venezuela, on the landing strip at Belen; Cerro Huachamacari in the background. Above: Looking up the Rio Capanaparo near its mouth; llanos lie beyond the gallery forest near the river.
Through the generosity of Mr. and Mrs. William S. Cowles of Shelburne, Vermont, who contributed their Helio Courier aircraft and their time as pilots, it was possible for Handley to make an aerial ecological survey of Venezuela. In sixteen days of flying, covering about 10,000 miles, he studied variations in vegetation and terrain that might affect the distribution of mammals.
Dr. Roberto Donoso-Barros of the Universidad de Chile, Santiago, has been working with James A. Peters in the preparation of a manual of neo-tropical squamata. This project, as well as the African mammal manual, is an approved Smithsonian project for the International Biological Program.
Unusually rich documentation of a collection of 150 Moroccan ethno- graphic specimens presented by Mrs. Elizabeth Bailey Wills of Bain- bridge Island, Washington, made it especially valuable for research purposes.
Additions to the collections of physical anthropology include ten careful portraits of presumed unmixed Carib Indians, a Peruvian skull willed by Mrs. Clara Thompson; and two Caribbean skeletons of considerable interest. Both of these are Negro slave skeletons with tooth mutilation typical of that practied in Cameroon and South- eastern Africa. One is on deposit from the Government of Grenada, West Indies, and the other is from St. Croix, Virgin Islands, given by Lieutenant Commander J. J. Wachtel.
Through Dr. Chester Benjamin, 122 used metal herbarium cases were transferred to the herbarium from the national fungus collections at Beltsville, Maryland. The new storage space permitted the expansion of a large block of flowering plant families so that they are more easily used without risk of breakage.
Mrs. Sophie G. Lutterlough, with Ralph Crabill, restored, relabeled, and rehoused great numbers of dried specimens of Myriapoda, in- cluding many unsuspected type specimens.
Under a grant from the National Science Foundation, Mrs. Phyllis Spangler pinned, dissected genitalia, labeled, and sorted to genus 10,500 aquatic beetles and recorded data from 9,000 identified speci- mens of the genus Tropisternus; she also completed cataloging one family and made considerable progress on cataloging three others, as well as rearranging the entire collection of aquatic beetles.
Among many important gifts by individual donors to the mineral and gem collection were a 265-carat, complexly twinned group of diamond crystals, by J. M. Wachtler; a set of 22 colored, irradiated diamonds, by Theodore and Irwin Moed, Inc.; and a white jade teapot of the Chien Lung period, by Mrs. Mildred Taber Keally.
The planning and writing of scripts for the future hall of Old World archeology made progress, with Mrs. Elly Dubinsky preparing exhibit units for the Greco-Roman alcove under the supervision of Gus W. Van Beek.
With the help of Mr. Walter Nichols, the American cultural attache in Tokyo, the statue was returned to Baron Ii's birthplace at Hikone in Omi Province.
The presentation took place on 16 November 1966 in the Hikone Public Hall, where the statue was accepted by Mayor Naoyoshi Ii, great grandson of Prime Minister Ii. The ceremony was attended by John L. Stegmaier, U.S. Consul-General for the Kobe-Osaka area, and Mr. Walter Nichols.
Outstanding mammal births included a sloth bear, a brown lemur, golden marmoset twins, five serval kittens, two of the rare little South African black-footed cats, and two golden cats. As always, the excite- ment that surrounds the birth of a gorilla in captivity attended the birth to Moka, the Zoo's lowland gorilla, of her third infant and first female, on April 8, 1967. Inaki, as the youngster was named, is being reared by Mrs. Bernard Gallagher, who successfully reared the first two gorillas born at the National Zoo. The birth this year of 5 Barbary apes, more than in any previous year, brings to 27 the colony which is being built up for the monkey island that is in the Zoo's future plans. Mating of the black rhinoceroses has been observed, and if the signs of pregnancy are reliable, a rhinoceros will be born during fiscal year 1968.
Of particular interest were two baby cheetahs, presented by Woodward & Lothrop, which were part of a window display at the store in January. Dr. Harry Hoogstraal, at the time stationed in Cairo, sent the Zoo a North African banded weasel, eleven European hoopoes, other birds, and a number of interesting reptiles. John Archbold, of Upperville, Va., gave two river otters. Edward Marshall Boehm, of Trenton, N.J., presented 29 specimens of rare birds, and S. Dillon Ripley contributed 18 birds, mostly waterfowl, and a muntjac — a small species of Asiatic deer. An albino turtle from Thailand was a gift from the Dusit Zoo, Bangkok, to the National Zoo, and was accepted on the Zoo's behalf by Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, who visited the Dusit Zoo in October.
Beautification of the Park continued under head gardener John W. Monday with the planting of 65 trees, 2000 evergreens, 4000 bulbs, and 5,100 annuals. Gifts of plants were received from Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, and also from the Arboretum, the D.C. Water Works, Botanical Gardens, Glendale Nursery, Glendale Hospital, and Walter Reed Hospital. An account of the work of the grounds department is contained in the Appendix (see note, p. 156).
The past year was a period of major construction and renovation at the Barro Colorado Island laboratory. Ernest Hayden, formerly master sergeant, U.S. Army, was appointed station manager. A new building was finished which will serve as a residence for a staff scientist and as additional dormitory space for visiting scientists. Eastman Kodak's experimental facility was relocated and the old Kodak building was converted into a combination residence and laboratory area. A new house and a screened-in dining building were constructed for the labor staff. The station acquired the new 40-foot fiberglass- hulled vessel James ^etek II to supplement and eventually to replace the present wooden vessel which has been in service for many years. The boat dock area, which had been filling up with stream sediment for a number of years, was cleared and dredged. The library, possibly the best in the Neotropics, continued to expand and is now more than 8000 volumes. Mrs. Alcira Mejia was promoted to full-time librarian, and Mrs. Nicholas Smythe was appointed library assistant.
Dr. Peter Glynn, who was engaged to begin a marine invertebrate program, is expected to arrive early next year. Three new research associates were appointed: John Eisenberg of the National Zoo; Paulo Vanzolini of the Departmento de Zoologia in Sao Paulo, Brazil ; and Patricio Sanchez of the Catholic University of Chile.
Scientists who joined the staff during the year are Dr. Elisabeth Gantt, biologist, from Dartmouth Medical School, who will work on membrane and pigment structure of algae. Chemist Vicente Julio Medina, postdoctoral student from the University of Georgia, joined the laboratory in January to work on light effects on nucleic acid and nucleotide metabolism. Dr. Francesco Parenti, visiting postdoctoral from the University of Milano, Italy, continued his work on protein synthesis in chloroplasts this year. Director William H. Klein was detailed to the Biology Branch of the United States Atomic Energy Commission for one year beginning September 1 . During his absence, Walter Shropshire was Acting Director.
Eugene Ostroff was awarded a one-year research grant to continue his work, started last year, related to the preservation and restoration of photographs. A paper on preservation of photographs, resulting from this work, will appear in The Photographic Journal. He visited Lacock Abbey, Chippenham, Wiltshire, England, the ancestral home of William Henry Fox Talbot, inventor of the photographic negative system used today for producing unlimited paper prints. An attempt to discover the remains of the inventor's laboratory shed, carried out in cooperation with the National Trust (Britain), failed to reveal meaning- ful artifacts, but six Talbot laboratory jars found in the attic were generously lent for display at the Smithsonian by Mrs. Katherine Burnett Brown, great-granddaughter of Fox Talbot.
Opportunity was given to inspect Talbot's personal photographic collection, owned by Mrs. Burnett Brown; a catalog of the collection is being prepared by Ostroff, and the appropriate preservation measures applied to the prints.
Mrs. Anne W. Murray completed research on her paper, "Sunshades, Parasols and Umbrellas," and continued investigation of certain aspects of the history of 18th- and early 19th-century American costume. For The Institute of Pennsylvania Life and Culture, June 21 through June 24, she lectured and served as chairman of a seminar on historic American costume.
A numismatic seminar consisting of eleven sessions was held by the division of numismatics from March 9 through May 18, 1967. Dr. and Mrs. Clain-Stefanelli developed the program as a survey of the science of numismatics and its aims, and it included a discussion of the most important numismatic references. Coins as documents of history and art in coinage formed the subject of two sessions. Two other sessions giving a survey of coining metals and of coining techniques provided the necessary basis for a presentation of special methods germane to numismatic research, such as the comparative study of dies in order to establish chronological sequences of coins. The application of scientific methods of investigation — particularly physics — in numismatics was the subject of another session. The concepts guiding the activity of numismatic museums throughout the world and a history of the Na- tional Numismatic Collections completed the series of seminars. In the review session, the curator emphasized the necessity for a continuous reappraisal of the scope of numismatics.
In July Dr. Wilcomb E. Washburn addressed the 1966 meeting of the Anglo-American Conference of Historians, London, England, speaking in behalf of the overseas historians in response to the welcome of C. V. Wedgwood, representing the English historians. He participated in a conference on the Discovery of America held at the Centre d' Etudes Superieures de la Renaissance de Tours, France, giving papers on the Vinland map and on the American Indian; in the organization meeting of the Society for Historical Archaeology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas; and in a planning conference on American Indian history at the University of California at Los Angeles, where he spoke briefly on opportunities in the study of American Indian history.
In collaboration with museum specialist Howard P. Hoffman, curator of naval history Philip K. Lundeberg continued research on the construction of Benedict Arnold's squadron on Lake Champlain, a study which will include detailed plans of the Continental gondola Philadelphia. He continued preparation of a catalog of United States warship models, and construction was undertaken of models of both the gondola Philadelphia (1776) and the British ship-of-the-line America (1749), the latter based on plans by Mr. Merritt A. Edson, Jr., of Washington, D.C. In addition to his work on the Philadelphia model, Hoffman prepared an exceptionally detailed set of plans of a mid- 18th-century octant constructed by Benjamin King of Newport, Rhode Island, and temporarily on loan from Brown University. This remarkable early octant reveals a precision of workmanship exceptional in early American instrument making.
In electricity, particular attention has been devoted to 20th-century apparatus. A large number of important cathode-ray tubes and tele- vision sets associated with the career of Aldan B. DuMont has been given by Mrs. DuMont and by the Fairchild Instrument and Camera Corporation. The most important single item received, from Stanford University, was a five-ton magnet constructed and used by James Arnold and others as students of Felix Bloch in extending Bloch's Nobel Prize-winning research on nuclear magnetic resonance.
Deere & Company of Moline, Illinois, presented a "Waterloo Boy" Model N, and a John Deere Model "D" tractor. A 1917 Fordson tractor was given by Mrs. Frank Coron, Wantaugh, L.I.; a cheese press by Carlton M. Gunn of Sunderland, Massachusetts; and a hand- operated stump puller by Mr. McMechan, Joplin Globe, Joplin, Missouri.
Some of the more important gifts of ceramics and glass were : from Hans Syz, 23 pieces of rare 18th-century European porcelain, including an exceptionally fine Berlin vase; Mr. and Mrs. Edward M. Pflueger, five 18th-century ceramic items, including an outstanding Tournay bust of Louis XV; Mrs. William A. Sutherland, eight pieces of 18th- century English porcelain, including a fine Chelsea pitcher; Lloyd E. Hawes, 73 pieces of 18th- and early- 19th-century English earthenware, of which 53 were various types of Wedgwood wares not heretofore represented in the collections; the Joanne Toor Cummings fund, an extremely fine English, salt-glazed teapot, dated about 1750; and from Mr. and Mrs. Jack Leon, a unique collection of 62 pieces of late- 18th- and early- 1 9th-century English, yellow glazed earthenware. The Louise M. Packard collection of 59 pieces of ancient glass was presented by her daughter, Mrs. Robert U. Geib.
John Sloan's original copper plate for the etching Copyist at the Metropolitan, of 1908-1910, a recent gift to the Smithsonian from Mrs. Helen Farr Sloan.
Equipment for a printing shop display was given by Mr. and Mrs. William Elvin. This material, in use at the Fairfax (Virginia) Herald since 1882, comprises composing frames, type cabinets, imposing tables, type cases and type, and many associated tools and records.
Magazine and fashion photographer Richard Avedon presented 239 of his original negatives, with prints, adding to the 100 original negatives and prints he donated in 1965. Some ten thousand glass- plate negatives of news subjects of the early 1900s, from the files of Underwood and Underwood News Photos, were donated by Mrs. John M. Stratton. The news photographs presented by the Associated Press and United Press International for the exhibition "Twenty Years of News Photography" were added to the print collection, documenting the history of photo-journalism. More than sixty photographs of herons (ca. 1954—1966) by Tokutaro Tanaka, displayed in the exhibition "Tanaka: Photographs of Heron Hill," were also added to the col- lection. "Portrait of Rafael Sala" (1924), by Edward Weston, and a selection of prints (ca. 1890-1905) by the 19th-century British photographer Frederick Evans were added to the collection of rare prints made by the now extinct platinum-printing medium. Photo- graphs by Arnold Genthe were donated by Miss Byrd Crimora Hazelton and Mrs. Edwin L. Ashton.
From Mrs. B. K. Nehru was received an unusual black and white Indian shawl; from Mrs. J. Roswell Gallagher, a collection of 53 hand woven early- 19th-century American figured table linens, and six volumes of hand-drawn diagrams of their weaves, the subject of a book written by the donor; from Mrs. H. F. Hallock, Jr., spinning and weaving implements used by her ancestors in Rumford, Maine, during the first half of the 19th century. An important 18th-century embroidery frame, an 18th-century blue-resist-dyed cotton quilt, and two spinning wheels of unrepresented types were also added to the collections.
Additions to the cultural history collections. included a fine 1860 schoolroom interior from Mason's Island near Mystic, Connecticut, from the Mason's Island Company; and a quality series of Hispanic religious panels (retablos) Irom 19th-century New Mexico given by Mrs. William C. F. Robards of Washington, D.C., niece of the Okla- homa missionary who collected them before 1920. The archeological excavations in Alexandria, Virginia, yielded a unique collection of cultural materials giving evidence of colonial tradesmen — shoemaker, potter, doctor, coppersmith, pharmacist, combmaker and tavern keeper. Richard J. Muzzrole undertook both the excavation and restoration programs.
Among the 132 examples added to the American costume collections were two gold watches given by Mrs. Robert Callen King and two Quaker wedding dresses given by Mrs. H. E. Snyder.
Several Appalachian dulcimers were acquired by Scott Odell on a field trip to the southern mountains and through correspondence with a Tennessee dealer. Further augmenting the collection of traditional American musical instruments, a rare 19th-century banjo made by the important early maker, Henry Dobson, was given by Mr. Hermann W. Williams, Jr., Director of the Corcoran Gallery of Art; and a Theremin (an electronic instrument) made by RCA was given by Mrs. Ralph Richards.
To the Ralph E. Becker collection of political campaign objects the donor added several handpainted 19th-century political banners. From Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower was received a fuchsia matelasse evening gown.
Work has continued on completing the record of each dress in the First Ladies collection. Mrs. Sarah Lee Taft, a professional pattern maker from New York, has prepared patterns and sewing instructions for three more dresses, those of Mrs. Coolidge, Mrs. Harding, and Mrs. Wilson.
To the numismatic collections Willis H. duPont donated a group of 634 silver and copper coins of Russia struck from 1826 to 1841, during the reign of Czar Nicholas I, and Mrs. Catherine Bullowa-Moore contributed a decadrachm of Syracuse (Sicily) engraved by the famous artist Euainetos around 390 B.C. A group of 44 Greek bronze coins, from the Duke of Argyll and Charles Seltman collections, and a group of rare Athenian fractional silver coins from the 5th to 4th centuries B.C., were given by the Messrs. Stack.
Among personal memorabilia received was a silver medal, presented by Congress in 1 813 to Midshipman (later Surgeon) Bailey Washington for his services in the engagement between USS Enterprise and HMS Boxer, donated by Mrs. John W. Davidge of Washington, D.C. Through Captain Roger Pineau, USNR, the division of naval history received a portfolio of 27 contemporary Japanese prints and broadsides and a contemporary Japanese diary relating to Commodore Matthew C. Perry's expedition to the Far East in 1853-54. A large Confederate national ensign taken by Union naval forces during Burnside's attack on Roanoke Island on February 8, 1862, was donated by Mrs. G. F. Connal Rowan of Stirlingshire, Scotland.
Among loans made for exhibitions elsewhere were about 60 duplicate items from the electricity collection, to the Birla Industrial Museum in Calcutta; collections of quackery devices and patent medicines, loaned to the Illinois Chapter of the Arthritis Foundation for their exhibit at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago; and the first electrocardiograph of its kind to be used in Washington, D.C., to the Washington Heart Association for display in the lobby of the District Medical Society building as a memorial to Dr. Thomas Simms Lee.
The wedding dress of Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower was placed on special exhibit in the First Ladies Hall to honor the 50th wedding anniversary of General and Mrs. Eisenhower. As part of a preliminary celebration of the Bicentennial of the American Revolution, an exhibit commemorating the 1 75th anniversary of the Bill of Rights gave special attention to the contributions of George Mason of Virginia toward its establishment.
A museum function of great interest to the aerospace community was the presentation, by the National Aeronautic Association, of the 1965 Robert J. Collier Award to James E. Webb and the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden on October 19, 1966. Due to a re-scheduling of presentation dates, the 1966 Collier Award was presented to James McDonnell of the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation on May 24, 1967. On each occasion Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey presented this, the most highly respected award in the aerospace field.
Collier Trophy Awards were presented by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey. Upper: 1965 Award (from left) the Vice-President; Edward C. Sweeney, then President of the National Aeronau- tic Association; Secretary Ripley; Mrs. Hugh L. Dryden, representing her late husband, former Deputy Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Admin- istration; and the co-recipient, NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Lower: 1966 Award (from left) NAA President James F. Nields, Secretary Ripley, the Vice President, and recipient James S. McDonnell.
Model of the "14-bis" airplane in which Alberto Santos-Dumont made the first flight in Europe, September 13, 1906, is examined by Smithsonian Regent Clinton P. Anderson, Ambassador Vasco Lietao da Cuna of Brazil, and Mrs. Anesia Pinheiro Machado, who pre- sented the model and other Santos- Dumont memorabilia to the Museum.
Historic memorabilia, including scale models of early designs of the aeronautical pioneer Alberto Santos-Dumont, Brazilian pioneer in Aeronautics, presented by Mrs. Anesia Pinheiro Machado, and accepted by Smithsonian Regent Clinton E. Anderson.
Astronautics and Curtiss A-l Club Bell Aerosystems Company Bennett, Mrs. Keith B. Bergling, Joseph C. Boeing Company Byoir (Carl) and Associates Caldwell, Frank W. Coast Guard, U.S. Connecticut Aeronautical Historical
Durant, F. C, III Fairchild Hiller Corporation Fernandez, Peter Ford Instrument Company Furnish, Joseph H. Gay, Errol J. Grocock, Joseph F. Gilfert, Mrs. D.
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Cor- poration Harrington, Mrs. Cora B. Harmel, Mrs. Falk Hastings, Russell Hausler, Walt Hickey, John E. Hirsch, R. S. Houghland, Vern Ide, Mrs. John J.
Juptner, Joseph P. Kinney, James L. Krickel, John H. Lane, Mrs. Orley Library of Congress, U.S. Lockheed Aircraft Company Lockheed-Georgia Lundahl, Eric
McDonnell Aircraft Corporation Madison, Donald T. Marshall, T. W. Martin Company Martin, W. E. Manly, Miss Trammel Morehouse, Harold Mussey, Robert
The head curator of Near Eastern art, Richard Ettinghausen, con- tinued research in Near Eastern studies, with emphasis on recent ac- cessions and special attention given the two silver heads (66.23 Persian, Sasanian, mid-6th century, and 66.24 Persian, Parthian, 1st century B.C.-lst century A.D.). In February 1967 Dr. Ettinghausen retired to accept a teaching position at New York University.
Upon invitation of the Government of Iran, Mr. Ettinghausen attended the opening of the new Pahlavi Library in Teheran and a subsequent Congress of Iranologists from August 31 to September 8, 1966. To commemorate the occasion, a set of Ars Orientalis was pre- sented to the new National Library of Iran.
Mrs. Ellen Johnson Laing completed her work at the Gallery in June on her Hackney Scholarship and accepted a teaching assignment at Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan. She received her doctorate in April from the University of Michigan.
Care of the works of art was shared by several of the staff members. The technical laboratory examined, cleaned, and/or repaired, as necessary, a total of 26 objects. In addition, 47 objects under considera- tion for purchase were examined ; 29 objects were examined or repaired for other museums and individuals. Restorer Ben B. Johnson examined, repaired, and cleaned 16 oil paintings. Mr. Takashi Sugiura, with the help of Mr. Makoto Souta and Mrs. Kumi Kinoshita, cleaned, re- touched, and remounted a total of 21 Chinese and Japanese paintings.
The fourteenth annual series of illustrated lectures, held in the auditorium, included: "Recent Discoveries in Mainland China," Dr. Bo Gyllensvard>
Swann, Royal Ontario Museum, Canada (March 14, 1967). "The Individual in Late Egyptian Portraiture after 700 B.C.," Dr.
Advice and assistance was provided in a number of areas, such as the selection, design, and planning for the monumental Calder stabile, to be presented to NCFA for the Smithsonian by Mrs. Morris Cafritz.
Among the major gifts received was the S. C. Johnson and Son s collection, a group of 102 contemporary paintings, which will constitute the core of the modern section of the survey of American art at the 1968 opening of the new galleries. A group of 209 watercolors was presented to NCFA by the Ford Motor Company. A gift of 20 works by Henry Lyman Sayen, from the artist's wife and daughter, are being prepared (with other works from a similar period in Philadelphia) for a future exhibition. Other recent gifts include Mary Cassatt's Spanish Dancer Wearing a Lace Mantilla, donated by Mrs. Victoria Dreyfus; Robert Henri's The Blind Singer, by J. H. Smith, Jr.; George Bellows' Mr. and Mrs. Philip Wase and Raphaelle Peale's Melons and Morning Glories, both given by Paul Mellon; and John Sloan's Gwendolyn, donated by Mrs. John Sloan.
The library collections of the NCFA and National Portrait Gallery were moved to spacious third-floor areas of the remodeled Patent Office building. NCFA received by purchase or exchange 538 books and catalogs; subscriptions to 70 periodicals were paid. In addition to items received by purchase and exchange, gifts were received, among which the most notable collections came from Dr. and Mrs. Charles Nag el, James Billman (from the Estate of Victor Proetz), Mrs. Adelyn D. Breeskin, and Stefan Munsing. Each of these dona- tions consisted of several hundred items. Another important gift was the complete set of the "March of America" series, donated by the publishers, the Xerox Corporation.
To Be Alive (October 26-December 4, 1966). The exhibition consisted of approximately 20 color photographs, blown up to exhibition scale and selected from the highly praised film of the same title produced for the Johnson Wax Company pavilion at the New York World's Fair, 1964-65. The still photographs came directly from the book form of the film published by the Macmillan Company, which co- ordinated with NCFA in planning the exhibit. The United States at the 1966 Venice Biennale (December 1, 1966-January 15, 1967). The exhibition "brought home" the official American presentation at the XXXIII Venice Biennale, the prestigious bi- ennial International Art Exhibition. The four artists selected to represent the United States were Helen Frankenthaler, Ellsworth Kelly, Roy Lichtenstein, and Jules Olitski; 23 paintings and one sculpture were shown. William Glackens in Retrospect (February 10-April 2, 1967). Charles Buckley, Director of the City Art Museum of St. Louis, selected 132 paintings, drawings, and etchings that surveyed the work of this important American artist from the 1890s to 1937. March of America (April 16-22, 1967). This small exhibit, organized in recognition of National Library Week, centered on the "March of America" series published by Lmiversity Microfilms Library Service, Xerox Education Division. Consisting of 100 facsimile editions of significant literature in the study of American history, it also included a selection of the original volumes. Stanton Macdonald-Wright (May 4-June 18, 1967). This retrospective exhibition of the work of one of America's pioneer artists in the 20th-century abstract form contained over 90 paintings which sur- veyed the 77-year-old artist's well-known Synchromist period (circa 1912-1919) and showed the progression of his work through 1967. Sections of a large 1935 mural, recently acquired by NCFA, were featured. Corollary to the exhibit were the first public presentation of Mr. Wright's unique Synchrome Kineidoscope, a film-art projec- tion device, and the publication of a catalog which collected and reprinted many of the artist's commentaries on his artistic theory and philosophy.
Jane Snyder, under the direction of the assistant for special services, did research on the history of the Venice and Sao Paulo biennials and on the old Patent Office building. Mrs. Daryl Rubenstein worked in the office of the assistant for special services as a volunteer doing special research for press releases and other projects. Following the resignation of John Latham, in May, Jane Morse assumed temporary direction of activities as acting assistant for special services.
The Art-in-the-Embassies Program, directed by Mrs. Nancy P. Kefauver, Department of State adviser on fine arts, combines the
Staff members participated in one or more sessions of the White House Fellows' Seminar. In addition, Mrs. Breeskin delivered a lecture on Jasper Johns in connection with the exhibition of his drawings; lectured to the Smithsonian Associates on the "Art of Mary Cassatt" and "New Trends in American Art"; participated in a two-day seminar on American Civilization during which she spoke six times to different groups; and lectured at the Northwood High School in Bethesda on "Art and Society," at a banquet for the Smith- sonian Council on "The Role of Museums in Promoting the Advance- ment of Culture," and at the International Club in Washington on the "Role of Art in International Understanding."
The National Collection of Fine Arts provided Saul Steinberg with office space for several months during his term as the first Smithsonian Institution artist-in-residence. Mr. Steinberg presented the Smithsonian Institution with a 50-foot scroll depicting his impressions of Wash- ington during his stay.
Other personnel, on special status, who provided valuable support to the NCFA, were: William Hofer, consultant designer; Mrs. Eva Thoby-Marcelin, who did special research on educational-program and sales-desk development; and Mallory Randle, on a predoctoral internship given by the Smithsonian Research Foundation, who performed research on murals and sculpture of the Public Works of Art Project. Valuable assistance was also provided through the intern- ship program; the number of summer interns increased from 9 in 1966 to 12 in 1967.
Resignations and transfers included Farnham Blair, Susan Bratley Hornbostel, John Latham, and Mrs. Priscilla Wolff. The staff was saddened by the October 2 1 death of Rowland Lyon, who had resigned in August 1966. A further loss was sustained in the tragic death of Linwood Lucas on April 23, 1967.
Mrs. Adelyn D. Breeskin has devoted much time to research on the American artist Mary Cassatt, in preparation for the publication of a catalogue raisonne of Cassatt's works. For nine weeks during winter she was assisted by Joyce Keener, a student intern from Ben- nington College. Her studies carried her to all of the major museums, university art galleries, and dealers in the United States, London, and Paris. She has completed research on about 300 pastels, 269 oils, and 300 watercolors and drawings, and hopes to complete the work within the year. The two-volume catalogue raisonne will be published by the Smithsonian Institution Press.
During the year, the roster of the National Portrait Gallery Commis- sion remained the same, with those whose membership had expired being reappointed to a new term. The newest member, Dr. Edgar P. Richardson, former Director of the Detroit Institute of Arts and of the H. F. du Pont Winterthur Museum, who was appointed just previous to the beginning of the fiscal year, has been extremely helpful, giving the Gallery wise advice based on many years of practical ex- perience in the museum field in general and in American art in particular.
Adlai Stevenson, by Trafford Klots, gift of Mrs. Marshall Field and Mrs. Elizabeth Ives, 1967. (NPG.67.33)
A satiric self-portrait of George Gershwin is a gift from his brother Ira; a likeness of Andrew Jackson by James Tooley, Jr., comes from Mary Lively Hoffman, Charles T. Lively, and William H. Lively; Charles Cotesworth Pinckney by Henry Benbridge and a self-portrait of James Barton Longacre, whose engraved portraits comprised the National Portrait Gallery of Distinguished Americans, published in 1834—39, were both purchases; a pair of portraits of General and Mrs. Samuel Smith by Gilbert Stuart was a gift from Dr. and Mrs. B. Noland Carter in memory of Dr. Carter's aunts Miss Mary Coles Carter and Miss Sally Randolph Carter; a painting of Adlai E. Stevenson by Trafford P. Klots was given by Stevenson's sister Mrs. Ernest L. Ives and Mrs. Marshall Field ; a bust of Katherine Cornell by Richmond Barthe and a group of portraits of American Negroes came from the Harmon Foundation; a splendid likeness of Elihu Root by Augustus Vincent Tack was a bequest from the late Duncan Phillips; and finally a bronze bust of Florenz Ziegfeld, by an unknown artist was a gift from an anonymous donor. A full list of gifts and purchases is appended.
Roosevelt, Eleanor Root, Elihu Rose, Billy Sabin, Albert Bruce Sandburg, Carl Sandburg, Carl Schoenberg, Arnold Smith, Mrs. Samuel
Mrs. Richard Purdy Duncan Phillips Museum Fund Edward R. Amateis Edward Steichen Mrs. Dore Schary Mrs. Abraham Turoff Dr. and Mrs. B. Noland Carter
In July 1966, Mrs. Virginia Purdy spent three days in Nashville, Tennessee, working with a photographer to catalog the portraits of Andrew Jackson and his circle at the Hermitage. Notes were made on other Jackson portraits in and around Nashville. This kind of re- search in the field represents one of the Gallery's approaches to the study of American portraiture. Another approach has been the acqui- sition of photographs of all portraits in several of the nation's major repositories, and many items from the Gallery's prints and photo- graphs collection are being integrated into the Catalog. Several steps were also taken to coordinate the program of the Gallery with related works of the Prints and Photographs Division of the Library of Congress.
Daniel J. Reed has worked with the National Portrait Gallery Commission's recently appointed research and publication com- mittee, of which Dr. E. P. Richardson is chairman, to set up the Gallery's future program. As a result of recommendations of this committee and divisions of the full Commission of the Gallery and its Director, the history department is responsible for the overall editing of a catalog of the Gallery's permanent collection and all future ex- hibition catalogs.
Dr. Reed, who went on a year's leave of absence in January, spoke on the program and collections at the Wayne State University in Detroit. An article by him on the Catalog of American Portraits will appear in the July issue of the American Archivist. Dr. Reed's absence leaves a large gap in the staff but it was felt important to permit him to perform a public service by pursuing, on a temporary basis, work with the National Commission on Libraries. He has continued dili- gently, however, to keep abreast of the activities of his department. Meanwhile, Mrs. Purdy, the assistant historian, has been an able substitute in his absence covering the day-to-day activities in the field of history.
Librarian William Walker and Mrs. Shirley Harren of the Library staff are members of the District of Columbia Library Association, and Mrs. Harren became a member of the Special Libraries Associa- tion this year, of which the Librarian was already a member. In the local chapter of the Special Libraries Association, Mr. Walker served as Chairman of the local Picture Division Group. This library group met in the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries building, where it was addressed by Mrs. Purdy of the NPG staff. During the year, Mr. Walker, Mrs. Harren, and Mrs. Aleita Hogenson have worked as a reference staff with curators and researchers in the preparation of all exhibitions mounted by NCFA and NPG. They have also assisted in regular research in the library and, in addition, have double checked bibliographies prepared by research staff.
Mr. Adams made himself acquainted with every aspect of the Gal- lery's program and ingratiated himself with the entire staff during his stay here. Before leaving he prepared a report for the Director in which he made certain suggestions, tactfully pointing out, however, that the comparison of the Washington with the London galleries was based on little more than the fact that both were concerned only with portraits of those who had made distinguished contributions to the history of
General Samuel Smith, by Gilbert Stuart, gift of Dr. B. Noland Carter in memory of Miss Mary Coles Carter and Miss Sally Randolph Carter, 1966. (NPG.66.50)
A farewell tea was given in the Gallery by Mr. and Mrs. Adams before they left Washington, and the staff saw them go with very real
Lastly, the Gallery has had much welcome aid this year in the form of the various young people who have taken part in its program. Nora Attems was volunteer assistant to Charles Olin in the Conserva- tion Laboratory, and Tescia Yonkers was a volunteer for the summer in the Curator's office. From the Smithsonian's summer-intern educa- tion and training program the Gallery's share of workers were William Michael Bigel, Patricia Greene, Mary Grace Holback, Norvell Jones, Mary Ann Mears, and Frances Yost; and from the Office of Economic Opportunity, one representative of the Neighborhood Youth Corps, Kathleen Bowen. Finally, the Gallery was able to employ four 700- hour appointees, Nancy Beinke, Tom Carter, Mrs. Mona Dearborn, and Mrs. Anna Gregersen, with whose aid many things were accomplished that would otherwise have been quite impossible.
In addition to items received by the joint library by purchase or exchange, over two thousand books, catalogs, and journals were re- ceived as gifts, of which the most notable came from Mrs. Adelyn Breeskin, Stephan Munsing, Dr. and Mrs. Charles Nagel, and the estate of the late Victor Proetz. Each consisted of several hundred items.
The National Gallery of Art, although established as a bureau of the Smithsonian Institution, is an autonomous and separately administered organization and is governed by its own Board of Trustees. The statutory members of the Board are the Chief Justice of the United States, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, ex officio. On April 5, 1967, Stoddard M. Stevens was elected a general trustee of the National Gallery of Art to serve in that capacity for the remainder of the term expiring July 1, 1971, thereby succeeding John N. Irwin II. On May 4, 1967, Lessing J. Rosenwald was reelected a general trustee of the Gal- lery to serve in that capacity for the term expiring July 1, 1977. The three other general trustees continuing in office during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1967, were Paul Mellon, John Hay Whitney, and Dr. Franklin D. Murphy. On May 4, 1967, Paul Mellon was reelected by the Board of Trustees to serve as President of the Gallery, and John Hay Whitney was reelected Vice President.
Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, S. Dillon Ripley. John Hay Whitney. Dr. Franklin D. Murphy.
Gifts and bequests of money and securities were made by Auchincloss, Parker and Redpath; Avalon Foundation; Mrs. Ailsa Mellon Bruce; Estate of Chester Dale; J. I. Foundation, Inc.; Institute of Appliance Manufacturers, Inc.; Samuel H. Kress Foundation; Estate of Miss Loula D. Lasker; Mr. Douglas B. Maitland; Mrs. Cordelia S. May; The A. W. Mellon Educational and Charitable Trust; Mr. Paul Mellon; Old Dominion Foundation; Mr. Allen E. Ripingill; Mrs. James T. Saari ; and Mr. John Walker.
Collection (April 21 through June 7, 1967). 100 European Paintings and Drawings from the Collection of Mr. and Mrs.
A booklet on the new acquisition Ginevra de'Benci by Leonardo da Vinci was written by Perry B. Cott. The introduction to the catalog 101 American Primitive Water Colors and Pastels from the Collection of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch was written by William P. Campbell and subsequently republished in the October issue of Art News. An article and exhibition catalog on Giovanni Batista Gaulli for the Oberlin College Bulletin was written by Mr. Cooke. An article entitled "The National Gallery" written by Miss Susan Bell was published in the Catholic Traveler, March 1967.
Seven new catalogs of special exhibitions were placed on sale: 17th- and 18th-Century European Drawings; Chinese Art from the Collection of H. M. King Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden; J 01 American Primitive Water Colors and Pastels from the Collection of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch; a second edition of French Paintings from the Collections of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon and Mrs. Mellon Bruce; Festival Designs by Inigo Jones; 100 European Paintings and Drawings from the Collection of Mr. and Mrs. Leigh B. Block; Gilbert Stuart, Portraitist of the Young Republic.
There were produced 11 new 11" x 14" color reproductions (to make a total of 295 subjects), 5 new color postcards (for a total of 244 subjects), and 13 2" x 2" color slides (for a total of 440 subjects). A slide set, Painting in Georgian England, from the collection of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon, was made available with text and a recorded lecture.
Ginevra de'Benci, by Leonardo da Vinci, ca. 1480. Below: Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson and Mrs. J. Lee Johnson (back to camera), President of the Amon Carter Museum of Western Art in Fort Worth, Texas, with Ernest R. Feidler, the National Gallery's Secretary, Treasurer, and General Counsel (left), and Director John Walker viewing the Gallery's Ginevra de'Benci on Tuesday, April 4, 1967.
Under the supervision of Richard H. Bales, Assistant to the Director in Charge of Music, 38 concerts were given on Sunday evenings in the east garden court. The Gallery Orchestra, conducted by Mr. Bales, played ten of these concerts; two of them were made possible by grants from the Music Performance Trust Fund of the American Recording Industry. Thirty-two concerts were made possible by funds bequeathed to the Gallery by William Nelson Cromwell, and the 24th American Music Festival, consisting of six concerts on consecutive Sunday evenings, April 9-May 14, was sponsored by the J. I. Founda- tion, Inc. All concerts were broadcast locally by radio station WGMS- AM and FM. Music critics of the local papers continued their coverage of the concerts.
During intermissions at the concerts, talks on art subjects were given by members of the educational department, and program notes were given by Mr. Bales.
Two one-hour television programs by the National Gallery Orches- tra, with Mr. Bales conducting, were telecast locally over WTOP-TV on November 29, 1966, and February 21, 1967. Paintings and sculpture in the Gallery's collections were reproduced.
Mr. Bales appeared as a guest on radio programs and at civic occasions, and served as chairman of the Instrumental Music Panel of the Arts Advisory Committee of the D.C. Board of Recreation during February and March 1967. He was awarded a certificate for the National Gallery Orchestra television concerts by the American Association of University Women. Mr. Bales' National Gallery Suite No. 3 and other compositions were performed by several orchestras and solo recitalists in other cities during the season.
Principally responsible for the aforementioned nuclear science work have been Dr. Bernard Keisch and Dr. Robert L. Feller, senior fellow of the Research Project.
Toward the end of January, the Committee to Rescue Italian Art (CRIA) requested that Dr. Feller be given leave to go to Florence to assist on problems concerning the care and treatment of frescoes which had been damaged by the flood of the Arno on November 4, 1966. His investigations, made in collaboration with the analytical laboratory at Mellon Institute, soon showed that two kinds of salts were causing problems in the flood-soaked walls: a water-soluble type, such as sodium sulfate, and a water-insoluble type, calcium sulfate dihydrate (gypsum). Several ways were devised to treat walls contaminated with water-soluble salts. The authorities in Florence later requested that Dr. Feller's visit be extended for a total period of two months to permit him to devote attention to an additional problem. Advice and assistance were needed on the properties of synthetic resins that might be used as adhesives and protective coatings in the work of preservation and repair. The Research Project thus has continued in the past year, in both practical and theoretical studies, to serve museum experts and artists everywhere in providing new knowledge for the care and treat- ment of museum collections.
Marjorie Setlogelo, 9, shows her sister Mrs. Albert Mohale, wife of the Am- bassador of Lesotho, and Roger L. Stevens the panel she painted for the Tom Sawyer Project (see p. 371). Below: The entrance plaza (east front) of the Kennedy Center. Architectural scale photograph by Checkman.
To fill the vacancy left by the resignation, March 17, 1966, of Ernest R. Breech, the President appointed Mr. Robert I. Millonzi of Buffalo, senior partner in the law firm of Diebold & Millonzi and a Commis- sioner of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission during 1952 and 1953. Mr. Millonzi's term will expire on Septem- ber 1, 1968.
Richard Adler Howard F. Ahmanson Floyd D. Akers Robert O. Anderson Ralph E. Becker K. LeMoyne Billings Mrs. Thomas W. Braden Edgar M. Bronfman Mrs. George R. Brown Joseph S. Clark Ralph W. Ellison Mr. Justice Fortas Charles Frankel Peter H. B. Frelinghuysen J. William Fulbright John W. Gardner Mrs. George A. Garrett Leonard H. Goldenson George B. Hartzog, Jr. Harold Howe II Robert F. Kennedy Mrs. Albert D. Lasker Robert Lehman
Erich Leinsdorf Sol M. Linowitz George Meany Robert I. Millonzi L. Quincy Mumford Edwin W. Pauley Arthur Penn Charles Percy Frank H. Ricketson, Jr. S. Dillon Ripley II Richard Rodgers Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. Mrs. Jouett Shouse Mrs. Stephen E. Smith Roger L. Stevens Frank Thompson, Jr. Walter N. Tobriner Jack Valenti William Walton William J. Waters, Jr. Edwin L. Weisl, Sr. James C. Wright, Jr.
Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, Mrs. John F. Kennedy, and Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower continue to serve as honorary co-chairmen of the Center.
Mr. Strong was born in Tacoma, Washington, in 1892, and lived for a time in Alaska. He graduated from Yale University in 1916, and served in the American Ambulance Corps and as a lieutenant of French Artillery 1917-1918. After working with the Guarantee Trust Company of New York, he joined the National Savings and Trust Company of Washington. He organized and established the Hattie M. Strong Foundation and for many years served as its President. From 1939 to 1941 Mr. Strong served as President of the Washington National Symphony. Ten months before Pearl Harbor he joined the United States Army and served in the Ordnance Department with the rank of major. For four years he served as chief liaison officer, International Division, Army Service Forces, with the rank of colonel. In 1942 he was sent on a special mission to China under White House priority. His
On December 8, 1966, a ceremony was held at the Center's site for the presentation of the first shipment of marble from the Government of Italy. A presentation was made by Ambassador Sergio Fenoaltea of Italy and the Chairman accepted the marble on behalf of the Center. During the ceremony a crate of marble weighing 900 pounds was opened and presented to Mr. Stevens by Ambassador Fenoaltea. The Italian Government is donating over 3,000 tons of white marble to the Center, which will meet the entire construction requirements. This gift, valued at more than $1.1 million, was formally pledged by Italian President Segni when President Kennedy visited Italy in 1963. The quarrying of the marble in the vicinity of Carrara has been com- pleted. Some of it was taken from the quarries from which Michelangelo obtained his marble. Three companies — Bufalini, Montecatini, and Henraux — are supplying the marble, which is being cut according to architectural specification before being crated and sent to Leghorn for export. American Export Isbrandtsen Lines is transporting all of the marble from Italy to Baltimore at no cost to the Kennedy Center.
The Friends of the Kennedy Center held their first annual meeting in Washington on Thursday and Friday, May 18 and 19. Over 200 members from 22 States and the District of Columbia attended the two-day event. The meeting began at the White House when Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, honorary chairman of the Kennedy Center, and a member of the Friends, received the Friends of the Kennedy Center at tea. Following the White House reception members met at the Kennedy Center site for a presentation of ten new Tom Sawyer panels, each painted by children from a different State.
New officers of the Friends, announced at the meeting, are Mrs. Polk Guest, Chairman; Mrs. Norris A. Dodson, Jr., and George Stevens, Jr., Vice Chairmen; Murray Preston, Treasurer; Mrs. David Ginsburg, Secretary; and Mrs. Frank G. Wisner, Member at Large.
Regional Chairmen have been named as follows: Mid- Atlantic, Mrs. Charles W. Engelhard, Far Hills, N.J.; South Atlantic, Mrs. Agnes H. Bahnson, Jr., Winston-Salem, N.C.; Gulf States, Mrs. Ellis Cooper, Laurel, Miss.; Midwest, Mrs. James H. Douglas, Jr., Lake Forest, 111.; Rocky Mountain States, Mrs. James H. Smith, Jr., Aspen, Colo.; and Pacific Coast, Mrs. John A. McCone, San Ma- rino, Calif.
President and Mrs. Zalman Shazar of Israel, during visit to Kennedy Center offices, are shown a model of the Center by Roger L. Stevens.
The standing committee formerly known as the JFK Center /GSA Liaison Committee was renamed the Building Committee. It is made up of five Trustees: the Chairman, Mrs. Shouse,, S. Dillon Ripley, George B. Hartzog, Jr., and Ralph Becker. Mr. Mullin and Colonel Powers serve as staff representatives and GSA is represented by the Commissioner of the Public Buildings Service, William Schmidt, and his Deputy, Robert Foster.
To appreciate fully some of the problems encountered in negotiating construction contracts and subcontracts, it is well to recall the history of the Center's design. The first blueprints submitted in 1959 by the architect, Edward Durell Stone, envisioned a Center on such a scale that the cost estimates at that time were $75 million. Subsequently the Trustees, after consultation with Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy, decided that this concept was not practicable, since funds of this mag- nitude could not be raised on a voluntary basis from the general public. Accordingly, the architect was requested to provide an alternative design, which was unveiled in September 1962 to general and en- thusiastic acceptance and approval. For reasons of economy and effi- ciency Mr. Stone recommended that all the halls be placed under one roof to afford savings in land usage, building materials, utilities, and managerial and maintenance personnel. This new concept was then estimated to cost $30 million, without the parking substructure.
Firms selected on the basis of reliability and favorable experience with similar projects were invited in June 1966 to submit bids for the general construction contract. The solicitation of bids on a selective basis was done with the approval of the Comptroller General of the United States and the concurrence of the Senate and House Com- mittees on Public Works and Appropriations. After the bids were received and evaluated, the John McShain Company of Philadelphia was awarded the general construction contract on July 22, 1966. The McShain bid of $249,000 for his fee, including all on-site and off-site supervision and overhead during construction, is about one-sixth of what a normal bid would be. Mr. McShain preferred to undertake
This gift of nearly 5,000 paintings and drawings and over 1,500 pieces of sculpture has been conservatively valued at $25,000,000 and is undoubtedly worth much more. Mr. Hirshhorn also gave $1,000,000 for future acquisitions for the collection. The terms of the gift required that the Smithsonian Institution obtain legislation and appropriations for the construction and operation of a museum and garden of sculpture on the Mall, and that the necessary appropriation be obtained before the end of the 90th Congress.
This cause was greatly advanced by the gracious and generous letter which President Johnson addressed to Mr. Ripley as Chairman of the Federal Council on the Arts and Humanities. This letter (see p. 14) recognizes museums as precious cultural and educational re- sources, and asks for recommendations of ways to support and strengthen them.
The new chief of the Conservation- Analytical Laboratory, Robert M. Organ, entered upon his assignment at the close of the year. Mr. Organ, who has had a distinguished career in the field of conservation and the analysis of museum objects, came to the Smithsonian Institu- tion from the Royal Ontario Museum. Before going to Ontario he was, from 1951 to 1965, chief experimental officer of the Research Laboratory of the British Museum. The Smithsonian is fortunate to have a man of his experience and ability as head of its conservation and analysis programs.
The opening of a new hall of meteorites, designed by Mrs. Dorothy Guthrie, represented another milestone in the exhibits renovation pro- gram of the Museum of Natural History. Other exhibits relating to the earth sciences were also completed this year under the direction of Mrs. Guthrie, including new exhibition cases in the gem and mineral halls. Work continued on the design and production of exhibits for the hall of physical geology, which is scheduled to be opened next year.
During the year, the freeze-dry facilities were extensively redesigned by Rolland O. Hower, supervisor of the freeze-dry laboratory. Installa- tion of new equipment was begun which will greatly increase produc- tion and will also make possible the freeze-dry preparation of much larger biological specimens than before. Publication of Mr. Hower' s comprehensive paper, The Freeze-Dry Preservation of Biological Specimens, elicited many letters of inquiry from the museum world.
Attention was given to the integrated classification and description of urban research. In this program Dr. Scott Keyes, University of Illinois, served as a consultant to the Exchange for six months. Dr. Keyes is also editor of Research Digest, published by the Bureau of
In the cataloging section the year was one of transition. With the arrival of Carol Raney as the new chief and the appointment of Charles King as serials cataloger in August, the professional staff has been complete for most of the year, and the output of cataloging increased accordingly. Expansion of the department into the space vacated by the acquisitions section resulted in a much better flow of work and improved control of materials in process. The survey of the manual system and preliminary report for the conversion of the serial records for machine processing was completed by the end of the year. In May the hand binding and commercial binding units were com- bined under the supervision of Mrs. Mary J. Pierce.
Philips, George. Travels in North America. 1824. Martin, Mr. and Mrs. Albert: 41 items on art. Nagel, Charles: 1488 items on art and art history. Proetz, Victor, Estate of: 195 items on fine art from his estate. Watson, Paul, Estate of: 137 items on communications from his estate. White, John H., Jr.: 86 items on transportation.
In November at the U.S. Department of the Interior Library's Biennial Departmental Workshop Mrs. Huffer spoke about the Smith- sonian Libraries — their history and collections. Informal talks were given throughout the year to visiting groups of foreign librarians and numerous groups of library graduate students. Jack Goodwin gave several lectures during the year, among them one on "The Historiog- raphy of the American Revolution" at the graduate school of Mary- land University. The Smithsonian Institution was elected to a two-year term of membership on the Federal Library Committee in June. Mrs. Huffer has continued her work with the Committee's Task Force on acquisitions of library materials and correlation of Federal library procedures. Staff members continue to be active in many professional societies and the Institution was well represented at meetings of the American Library Association and the Special Libraries Association.
Mrs. Ruth Schallert, who was appointed librarian for the botany department branch library in December, continued the review, weeding, and reorganization of the botany collection begun last year. An inventory of the collection was completed with the help of senior research associate William Archer. Reclassification of this collection from the Dewey to the Library of Congress system begins next year. An anonymous gift of nearly a thousand dollars, and special effort by the acquisitions section through the exchange program, added several desirable items to the collection and filled many gaps in the serial collection.
Miss Elizabeth H. Weeks in July 1966 was appointed branch librarian for the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory at Cambridge, Mas- sachusetts. With the addition of a full-time library aid the cataloging backlog was brought under control, a modest selective dissemination of information program was put into effect, and two library publications initiated — Library Acquisitions and Library Publications.
The editorial section was revised so that specific editors are no longer charged with the total editing and production of a particular series. Editors now receive manuscripts according to schedule priorities rather than subject matter, and they are usually relieved of production concerns. Direction of the section was assumed by Roger Pineau, formerly liaison editor of the Museum of History and Technology, on his ap- pointment to the position of managing editor. Mr. Pineau is a historian, translator, and Japanese linguist who has written several books and other publications. Although the editorial staff was reduced by four persons during the year, a considerable reduction in editorial backlog was achieved.
The production section was established under the direction of managing designer Stephen Kraft, a prominent member of the graphic arts community in the City of Washington, where formerly he conducted his own typography and design studio for 14 years. Subsequent to his appointment, he was joined by Mrs. Betty Sur, who came to the Press as assistant design and production manager from the publications office of the Library of Congress. Including an additional staff of two design- ers, the production section is responsible for the purchasing, scheduling, and design of Press printing.
The distribution section, under the able direction of Mrs. Eileen McCarthy, mailed out 306,494 publications. Midway in the year, it was decided to move the section to the second floor of a leased garage at 1242 Twenty-fourth Street, where the office personnel and entire stock of Press publications can be integrated in a unified operation. It is hoped that this move will give the Press sufficient warehouse space to accommodate expansion of inventory for at least five years.
Notable personal accomplishments include the selection of Crimilda Pontes' design of Islamic Art from the Collection of Edwin Binney, 3rd as one of the 25 best of the year by the jury for the Association of American University Presses. Miss Pontes was also awarded a place in the Art Directors Club of Washington annual show for her design of Art Treasures of Turkey. Upon request of Admiral Samuel E. Morison, Roger Pineau was detached for eight weeks to Japan, where he assisted Admiral Morison* with research for his forthcoming biography of
The Office last year welcomed two new staff members, David Challinor, as Deputy Director, and Kenneth Whitehead, as Deputy to the Foreign Currency Program Director. Dr. Challinor holds a degree
Foreign currency grants for projects in the biological sciences were also made to elements of the Smithsonian itself, through the Smith- sonian Research Foundation. Prominent among these were the in- auguration of the Mediterranean Marine Sorting Center in Tunisia, and a study of the behavior and ecology of the Ceylonese elephant, headed by Dr. John Eisenberg of the National Zoological Park, in cooperation with the University of Ceylon and the Wildlife Department of the Ceylonese Government's Ministry of State. The Sorting Center was established through the cooperation of the Tunisian Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries at Salambo on the coast north of Tunis; Dr. David Damkaer of the Smithsonian Oceanographic Sorting Center assumed duties as Resident Director in November
The Office continued to help with the programming of foreign visitors coming to the United States under Department of State or other Federal and private exchange of persons programs. A significant number of these visitors were public officials from ministries of culture or education interested in such subjects as the organization of the Smithsonian and its various bureaus, museum education, the U.S. National Museum Act, or Federal programs for the performing arts, sciences, and humanities in general. In this category were Mr. Wah- Siang Woon, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Cultural Affairs of Singapore, Dr. Prem Kirpal, Secretary of India's Ministry of Edu- cation; Ambassador Ante Rukavina, Executive Director of the Yugo- slav Fulbright Commission; Dr. K. N. Saxena, Field Advisor of India's National Council of Educational Research and Training; Mr. Janez Vipotnik, Yugoslavia's Federal Secretary for Education and Culture; Mr. Noom Yoonaidharma, Executive Secretary of the De- partment of Fine Arts of the Ministry of Education of Thailand ; and Mr. Chedli Klibi, Tunisia's Secretary of State for Information and Culture.
Visits to the Smithsonian and programming assistance were also arranged for museum directors from Australia, Brazil, the Republic of China, Ecuador, India, Rumania, Tunisia and Venezuela. Sig- nificant discussions were held on international conservation and national park museums with Mr. Webungo Bukachi Akatsa, Under Secretary of Kenya's Ministry of Natural Resources.
In addition, the Smithsonian accepted total programming respon- sibility for Joseph F. K. Acquaye, Assistant Director of Ghana's National Science Museum, and Guy Ramanantsoa of the Malagasy Government's Department of Forests and Water Resources. Mr. Acquaye, who was the recipient of a State Department specialist grant, received practical training with the Smithsonian's Office of Exhibits and a two-month observation tour of museums across the nation. Mr. Ramanantsoa, whose visit was in part funded by Duke University, studied with Dr. John Buettner-Janusch, of Duke's Medical Center, methods of breeding lemurs and other primates in captivity. He also observed various national parks and visited the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama. The Institution was pleased to have helped provide these opportunities for Mr. Ramar.antsoa, whose professional duties are directly concerned with the preservation of Madagascar's unique flora and fauna.
At the end of the period under review, the Smithsonian received His Excellency Asgeir Asgeirsson, President of the Republic of Iceland. A luncheon at which Vice President Humphrey and Secretary Ripley presided, was held for President Asgeirsson in the Museum of History and Technology. The Vice President spoke of the importance of co- operative scientific research in Iceland; Mr. Ripley outlined some of the Smithsonian's long-standing interests in Iceland and presented to the President, an ardent bibliophile, a specially bound and inscribed copy of Dilrer and His Time, recently published by the Smithsonian Institution Press.
In addition to Dr. Galler, Smithsonian scientists and staff members attending the Surtsey Conference were Kurt Fredriksson, curator of meteorites; William Melson, associate curator of petrology; David Challinor, Deputy Director of the Office of International Activities; and Helen Hayes, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Science. All had the opportunity to land on the island, which now boasts a modest combined laboratory and bunkhouse. As a result of his visit, Dr. Melson is collaborating with Icelandic scientists in the study of certain greenstones found around the core of Iceland's deeply eroded volcanos which are also enigmatically occurring in dredge hauls made along midocean ridges, especially the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, with increasing frequency.
In accord with a Board of Regents recommendation that the Smith- sonian explore the necessary measures to obtain U.S. membership, Smithsonian General Counsel Peter Powers and the Office Director sought the opinions of a wide range of museum conservators and officials of Federal agencies or private organizations concerned with conservation or historic sites preservation on the potential benefits of American membership in the Rome Centre, through consultations and meetings held at the Smithsonian. Uniformly favorable reactions were obtained, and it was with some gratification that in October 1966, the Institution received a letter from Joseph Sisco, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, expressing Department of State support of United States membership and suggesting that the Smithsonian might appropriately seek legislative action to achieve the same, in view of the Institution's professional concern with the work of the Rome Centre. In April of 1967, Mr. Powers and Frank A. Taylor, Director of the U.S. National Museum, attended the Centre's General Assembly in Rome as observers in order to obtain first-hand knowledge of the Centre's administration and programs. Upon their return, a draft bill providing for membership and a supporting statement giving detailed information on the programs and operation of the Centre was readied for submission to the Congress.
Planning proceeded for an experimental exhibit for the blind. Supported by a grant from the Vocational Rehabilitation Administra- tion, a proposal for an exhibit, ' : The Four Senses — Imagination and Flight," was prepared by Brian O'Doherty with the aid of a distin- guished advisory committee. Funds will be sought for the construction of this exhibit in the near future. It is our belief that Dr. O'Doherty's exhibit will be of the greatest interest to all museum visitors ; those who happen to be blind will perhaps be able to enjoy it even more than the sighted.
Built in 1 738 by Caleb Dorsey of Annapolis, Belmont is situated on 340 acres of rolling fields and woodlands bordering the Patapsco River and Park near Elkridge, Maryland. In 1805, Priscilla Dorsey married Alexander Hanson and since then the property has gone through numerous generations of the Dorsey- Hanson families. In 1917, ownership of Belmont was transferred from the last direct heir to a cousin and her husband, Mr. and Mrs. Howard Bruce.
Throughout the fall, winter, and spring the Junior League docents conducted weekend tours of the Museum of History and Technology for the general public, for Congressional constituents, and for numerous organized groups, including many from the foreign community. Mrs. Nicholas Paul was an active and effective chairman of the group.
Among the special events arranged by the Museum Service were the visits of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea, the President of the Republic of Turkey, the wife of the Vice President of Nationalist China, and the wife of the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, as well as presentations of the Robert J. Collier Trophy and awards of the Hodgkins and Langley Medals. Two major enter- tainments of the year were the dinners on February 21 and 22, the first for the Washington Diplomatic Corps, co-hosted by the Chief of Protocol and Mrs. Symington, the second for those members of the Congress most closely connected with the Smithsonian. At the latter the Vice President swore in the members of the American Revolution Bicentennial Commission.
Anderson Admiral and Mrs. George W. Anderson Mr. and Mrs. H. Loy Anderson His Excellency, The Ambassador of
Panama and Madame Arias Mr. and Mrs. James Y. Arnold Commander and Mrs. Clyde B. Ault Miss Madeleine Austin Mr. Robert Calhoun Baker Mrs. W. Edwards Beach Mrs. Walter E. Beach The Honorable and Madame Guillermo
The Princess Cito di Bitetto Mrs. Robert Woods Bliss Mrs. B. Pleydell Bouverie Mr. and Mrs. Willis Boyd Doreen The Lady Brabourne General and Mrs. Omar N. Bradley Donna Julia Brambilla Mr. A. Marvin Braverman Mr. and Mrs. E. Fontaine Broun Mr. and Mrs. Leon Brown The Honorable and Mrs. Percival F.
Buchanan, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. George R. Bunker Dr. and Mrs. Robert C. Burt Mrs. Harold W. Cannella The Princess Cantacuzene Mr. Charles T. Carey Dr. and Mrs. Leonard Carmichael Mr. and Mrs. Leslie E. Carpenter Miss Geni Chester
The Honorable and Mrs. Cyrus Ching Mr. Justice and Mrs. Thomas C. Clark Mr. and Mrs. Robert L. Clarkson Sir Bede and Lady Clifford Mr. and Mrs. Clark M. Clifford Mr. and Mrs. David P. Close Mr. Marvin J. Coles Mr. and Mrs. Donald L. Colvin Mr. and Mrs. John T. Connor Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Cook Mr. and Mrs. Harold Jefferson Coolidge The Honorable and Mrs. John Sherman
The Honorable and Madame Cretzianu Mr. and Mrs. Francis X. Crowley Mr. and Mrs. J. A. B. Dahlgren Mr. and Mrs. Freeman J. Daniels Mr. and Mrs. Harry R. Davidson Major General and Mrs. Howard C.
Davidson Mr. and Mrs. Andre de Limur Dr. and Mrs. Lowell Russell Ditzen Miss Alice L. C. Dodge Mrs. James P. Donahue Mr. and Mrs. M. Dorland Doyle Mr. and Mrs. Henry A. Dudley Mr. Franklin A. Durr General and Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower Mr. and Mrs. Shearen D. Elebash Mr. Douglas L. Elliman Mr. Alfred W. Englehardt Mr. Erik J. H. Eriksen Captain and Mrs. Evert Eriksson Mr. and Mrs. Benjamin C. Evans, Jr. Miss Meta Evans Mrs. Herbert Farrell
Italy and Madame Fenoaltea Judge and Mrs. Homer Ferguson Mrs. Harold Fitzgerald The Honorable and Mrs. John Clifford
Garrett Judge and Mrs. Oliver Gasch Mr. and Mrs. Leonard F. Genz Mr. and Mrs. Charles Carroll Glover,
Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Robert M. Gorrell Major General Ulysses S. Grant III The Honorable Robert Keith Gray The Honorable Homer H. Gruenther General and Mrs. Wade H. Haislip Mr. and Mrs. Harris Hammond Mr. and Mrs. Donald E. Handelman Mr. and Mrs. Meyer Handelman Mr. and Mrs. William L. Hanley Mr. Channing W. Hare General and Mrs. Franklin A. Hart Mr. and Mrs. Robert Z. Hawkins Mr. and Mrs. George W. Headley Mr. and Mrs. Ray Henle Mr. Stephen Hopkins Hensel Mr. and Mrs. Kurt Hetzel Mrs. J. Monroe Hewlett Mr. Edward T. Howe Mr. Richard H. Howland Dr. and Mrs. R. Gordon Hoxie Mr. and Mrs. John B. Hull Miss Laura Hungerford
Sweden and Madame Jonsson Mr. and Mrs. Samuel H. Kauffmann Mr. Thomas S. Kenan III The Honorable and Mrs. Joseph P.
Kennedy Mr. and Mrs. A. Atwater Kent Dr. and Mrs. A. Atwater Kent, Jr. Miss Beverly King Mr. and Mrs. Ludlow King, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Milton W. King Mr. and Mrs. Slocum Kingsbury The Honorable and Mrs. James R.
Knott Mrs. Katharine McCook Knox Mr. and Mrs. Fritz-Alan Korth The Honorable Fred Korth Miss Verita Korth Vice Admiral Emory Scot Land Mrs. Clark J. Lawrence Mrs. Sidney Kent Legare Mr. and Mrs. George C. Leib Lady Lewis Miss Jane Lingo Dr. and Mrs. George W. Lloyd Mr. Grover Loening Mr. and Mrs. John A. Logan His Excellency, The Ambassador of
McCone Mrs. Robert R. McCormick Mr. and Mrs. William P. McCracken Brigadier General Godfrey T. McHugh Mrs. J. P. McKinney Mr. William J. McManus Mr. Robert D. McMillen The Honorable and Mrs. Douglas
Greece and Madame Matsas Mr. and Mrs. Herbert A. May, Jr. Mr. Philip D. May His Excellency, The Ambassador of
India and Madame Nehru Dr. and Mrs. Walter R. Newbern Mr. Gerson Nordlinger, Jr. Mrs. Bissett Norment Mr. and Mrs. Barbu Niculescu Colonel Serge Obolensky Mrs. James R. Offield Mrs. Rufus L. Patterson His Excellency, The Ambassador of
Peru and Madame Pastor Colonel C. Michael Paul Mr. Richard E. Pearson Mr. and Mrs. Peter Pelham Mr. and Mrs. John S. Pillsbury Mr. and Mrs. Landra B. Piatt Mr. and Mrs. Charles W. Post Dr. and Mrs. M. Hayward Post Madame Edgar Prochnik Mr. Gene Raymond Mr. Justice and Mrs. Stanley F. Reed
Rose Mr. and Mrs. Marvin C. Ross Madame Augusto Rosso Mr. J. Frederick Roy Mr. and Mrs. Stephen Sanford Mr. and Mrs. John Schapiro His Excellency, The Ambassador of
Belgium and The Baroness Scheyven Mr. and Mrs. Theodore C. Sheaffer The Honorable and Mrs. Jouett Shouse Major General and Mrs. Alden K.
Sibley Miss Julia P. Sibley Sigma Alpha Theta Sorority Sigma Beta Epsilon Fraternity Mr. and Mrs. Douglas R. Smith Mr. and Mrs. Wendell Smith Mr. and Mrs. Humphrey Statter Mr. and Mrs. Theodore D. Stoney Rear Admiral and Mrs. Lewis L. Strauss Mrs. L. Corrin Strong General and Mrs. Philip G. Strong The Honorable and Mrs. John L.
Chile and Madame Tomic Mr. Carl W. Trent Mr. and Mrs. Bronson Trevor Mrs. John B. Trevor, Sr. Mr. and Mrs. John B. Trevor, Jr. Mr. Leonard W. Trimmer Mrs. Francis B. Trudeau, Sr. Dr. and Mrs. Francis B. Trudeau, Jr.
Tydings Mr. and Mrs. Andrew Van Pelt Mr. and Mrs. Edward Van Pelt Mrs. E. P. Van Zandt The Honorable and Mrs. Jamshed
Vesugar Mrs. Latimer Voigt Mr. and Mrs. H. Alexander Walker Miss Evelyn Walker Mr. and Mrs. James N. Wallace His Excellency, The Ambassador of
Willis, Jr. Mrs. Orme Wilson Dr. and Mrs. Max Wolf Mr. and Mrs. William G. Woodward Mr. and Mrs. Burdette S. Wright, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. J. Bernard Wyckoff Mrs. Robert R. Young Mrs. Jorge Zalles
Corporation Mrs. Dora Jane Janson Mrs. Ruth Carter Johnson Albert Kunstadter Family Foundation Mr. Morton D. May Robert and Beatrice Mayer Foundation Mrs . Louise Tompkins Parker Mr. Jefferson Patterson Mrs. Stanley J. Sarnoff Rita and Taft Schreiber Foundation Mr. David Scott Philip M. Stern Family Fund Mrs. Fredrika M. Tandler Mr. and Mrs. Stanley Woodward
Whitfield J. Bell, Jr. Association Librarian, American Philo- sophical Society, 105 South Fifth Street, Philadelphia, Penn- sylvania 19106. Born 1914. A.B. Dickinson College, Ph. D. University of Pennsylvania, 1947. Associated with Dickinson College 1937-1954; assistant and then associate editor of the Papers of Benjamin Franklin 1954-1961 ; and from 1961 Associa- tion Librarian of the American Philosophical Society. Editor of Bibliography of the History of Medicine in the U.S. and Canada (1948-1953) and Mr. Franklin (with L. W. Labaree) (1956). Author of Needs and Opportunities for Research in the History of Early American Science (1955).
John Whitelaw, Executive Assistant Mrs. Dorothy Rosenberg, Administrative Officer Otis O. Martin, Financial Management Adviser Douglas R. Martin, Internal Auditor Eldridge O. Hurlbut, Contracting Officer Robert Engle, Engineering Assistant Sidney R. Galler
Mrs. Helen L. Hayes, Special Assistant Harry Hyman, Special Assistant Michael A. Stahl, Administrative Officer I. Eugene Wallen, Head, Office of Oceanog- raphy and Limnology H. Adair Fehlmann, Supervisor, Smithsonian
Peter G. Powers, General Counsel Frederic M. Philips, 1 Director Anders Richter, Director Mrs. Mary A. Huffer, Acting Director Ruth E. Blanchard, Library of Congress Liaison
Curator Mrs. Margaret B. Klapthor, Associate Curator Mrs. Anne W. Murray, Associate Curator Herbert R. Collins, Assistant Curator Mrs. Claudia B. Kidwell, Assistant Curator C. Malcolm Watkins, Supervisor and Curator Richard E. Ahlborn, Associate Curator Rodris C. Roth, Associate Curator John T. Fesperman, Jr., Supervisor and Asso- ciate Curator Mrs. Cynthia A. Hoover, Associate Curator James M. Weaver, Concert Director Carl H. Scheele, Supervisor and Associate
Frances P. Smyth, Mrs. Erika Passantino, Barboura C. Flues, Mrs. Jean Taylor, Holly Teasdale, Renato Danese
William H. Anderson (Coleoptera), Mrs. Doris H. Blake (Coleoptera), Franklin S. Blanton (Diptera), Frank L. Campbell (Insect Physi- ology), K. C. Emerson (Mallophaga), Frank M. Hull (Diptera), William L. Jellison (Siphonaptera, Anoplura), Harold F. Loomis (Myriapoda), Carl F. W. Muesebeck (Hy- menoptera), Thomas E. Snyder (Isoptera), Robert Traub (Siphonaptera)
Willard W. Becklund (Helminthology), J. Bruce Bredin (Biology), Isabel C. Canet (Crustacea), Maybelle H. Chitwood (Worms), Ailsa M. Clark (Marine Inverte- brates), Elisabeth Deichmann (Echinoderms), Roman Kenk (Worms), Waldo L. Schmitt (Marine Invertebrates), Frank R. Schwengel (Mollusks), Gilbert L. Voss (Mollusks), Mrs. Mildred S. Wilson (Copepod Crustacea)
Mrs. Arthur M. Greenwood (Cultural History), Elmer C. Herber (History), Ivor Noel Hume (Cultural History), Fred W. McKay (Numis- matics), Mrs. Emery May Norweb (Numis- matics), R. Henry Norweb (Numismatics), Mrs. Joan Pearson Watkins (Cultural History)
The opening of the National Collection in the remodeled old Patent Office building was a stunning success. Years of effort by David Scott and his devoted staff culminated on May third in a splendid evening event, graced by President and Mrs. Johnson and some 3,000 guests who roamed the elegant, sometimes classic, sometimes modern halls, the lower sculpture room reminiscent of an Egyptian catacomb, the third-floor Lincoln Gallery so sublimely cool, chaste, and immense with its tight arches, the touch of the iron strapwork, the marble columns restored to a nacreous sheen thanks to the efforts of our hero of the occasion, Mr. Royal Murphy, the marble restorer. For Washington, it was an evening to be remembered.
The auguries seemed good. A community advisory council was formed early in 1967, chaired by Mr. Alton Jones, chairman of the Greater Anacostia Peoples, Inc., Mr. Stanley Anderson, later to become one of the first members of the new City Council of Washington, Mrs. Marion Hope, Mr. Ben Davis, and a good number of willing volunteers, in- cluding a sergeant of the 11th Police Precinct, Andrew Salvas. My col- league, Charles Blitzer was active from the beginning and we depended heavily on the advice of Mrs. Caryl Marsh, who had worked with neighborhood social problems in Washington. Our Smithsonian exhibits department, led by John Anglim and Ben Lawless, was keen to rush in and remodel the small 400-seat movie theater, and Robert Shelton was assigned by them to draw up a design. Long and prayerful meetings (most of them in a local church) with the advisory council ensued be- fore they decided the framework of the exhibits, their focus, and the degrees to which a variety of exhibits might appeal to local residents. By June 1967, we had selected a Director, Mr. John Kinard, a thirty-year- old, Washington-born youth worker who had worked in the Neighbor- hood Youth Corps and the Office of Economic Opportunity. Under John Kinard, who is vigorous and decisive, the exhibit plans were com- pleted and the work began. The seats were removed and a flat floor was installed with two single steps at intervals to take care of the slope. Six modules were constructed along the sides of the seating area, two to a section of the floor, so that each single step marked the partition be- tween the modules. The exhibits resulted from a vast number of sug- gestions, primarily from the advisory council, but also from Smithsonian guards and staff curators. A complete general store of the 1890s — ^just as it was in Anacostia — occupies one corner. In it there is a post office (for which we hope to get a license to operate) , old metal toys, a butter churn, an ice-cream maker, a coffee grinder, and a water pump, all of which work, and any number of other objects of the period from kero- sene lamps to flat irons, to posters and advertisements. There is another do-it-yourself area for plastic art, with, at present, class instruction by volunteers. There are skeletons of various kinds, some of which can be put together or disassembled. There is space for temporary art shows.
Particularly interesting has been the expansion of the Museum Shops under the imaginative direction of Carl Fox. Aside from books, pam- phlets, and cards, Mr. Fox has been concerned to demonstrate the vitality of the folk art tradition, and to encourage museum visitors to realize that they themselves are part of a continuing tradition of crafts-
With the support of the National Humanities Endowment the Office of Education and Training inaugurated a program to train future museum scholars. With help from Eugene Wallen and Richard Wood- bury, the Office sought and successfully obtained financial aid from the National Science Foundation for a program of summer research assistantships for outstanding undergraduates. Nathaniel R. Dixon, one of the most accomplished and innovative educators in the field of pri- mary and secondary education, left his position as principal of Scott- Montgomery Elementary School in the District of Columbia to join the Office of Education and Training as Associate Director and head of a newly established Division of Primary and Secondary Education in July of 1967. Mr. Dixon succeeded in redesigning the duties of that division's staff of five instructors in a way that forged a most effective instrument for placing the resources of the Smithsonian at the disposal of the na- tion's schools. Through the efforts of the Institution's scholarly staff and with the help of its Office of Education and Training, the Bureau of Graduate Education proposed in 1901 for the Smithsonian by the predecessor of the Association of Land-Grant Colleges and by other prominent educators has at long last become a reality.
Our Office of Education and Training has been reconstituted as the Office of Academic Programs under Mr. Blitzer's successor, Philip C. Ritterbush. The change of name signifies the Smithsonian's desire to continue its development as an auxiliary of academic institutions at every level, while perhaps reminding us that education in its broad popular sense is a much more widely diffused function of the entire Institution in its public service role. The initial objective of the Office in its new guise is to expand formal instructional activity : seminars, sur- vey courses, and tutorials. The President's Office of Science and Tech- nology has proposed, in a very welcome series of recommendations which Mr. Ritterbush helped originally to formulate, that the unique research facilities of the federal government be made available to uni- versities to the maximum practical extent. Expanded programs of visit- ing research appointments and further increases in our educational activities have been underscored as national policy objectives which
Signing of an agreement transferring administration of Cooper Union Museum to the Smithsonian Institution. To be known as the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, the name honors the founders, who were granddaughters of Peter Cooper and daughters of Abram S. Hewitt. Participating in the signing are, left to right, Henry F. duPont, chairman, and Albert Edelman, legal counsel, of the Cooper Union Museum Charitable Trust; Smithsonian Secretary S. Dillon Ripley; Dr. Richard F. Humphreys, president, and Daniel Maggin, chairman of the Board of Trustees, of Cooper Union; and Smithsonian legal counsel Peter Powers.
Another theme for discussion in meetings of the Council has been how best to organize our efforts in research and exhibition in order to take full advantage of interdisciplinary opportunities. The potential in- herent in our collections can rarely be seen in entirety from the vantage point of a single discipline. Coins fascinate the metallurgist, the his- torian of economics and trade, and the student of social customs, as well as the specialized collector. The Council has conducted extensive discussions of the Anacostia Neighborhood Museum, of proposed pro- grams in folklife and American studies, and of projects still in the planning stage, including the National Air and Space Museum and the National Armed Forces Museum. During the year Professor Elting Morison of Yale University, Andre Schiffrin of Pantheon Books, and Dr. Gordon Ray of the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation
Shortly after the museum's future came into question a committee of citizens was formed, which is called the Committee To Save the Cooper Union Museum. The committee was extremely active in bring- ing about the present addition of the museum to the Smithsonian or- ganization, and has pledged itself to the financial support of the museum. On 9 October an agreement was signed by Mr. Daniel Maggin, Chair- man of the Board of Trustees of Cooper Union, and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution that administration of the museum would be transferred to the Smithsonian. On 14 May 1968 the Supreme Court of the State of New York ruled that this transfer could be accomplished and the museum is now legally an entity within the Smithsonian Institution.
In its first Smithsonian year the Hirshhorn Museum, under Director Abram Lerner, moved with accelerated momentum toward three related goals : the acquisition of new paintings and sculptures, the development of plans and programs for the new museum on the Mall being designed by architect Gordon Bunshaft. and the continuation of its services to scholars and institutions involved in the history of modem American and European art. Mr. Hirshhorn' s generosity led in 1968 to the ac- quisition of more than five hundred new paintings and sculptures, rang- ing historically from antiquity to the works of today's young creators. To its renowned group of European and American sculpture of the nine- teenth and twentieth centuries, the collection in 1968 added significant works of Bourdelle, Chryssa, di Suvero, Dubuffet, Gabo, Lachaise, Lichtenstein, Miro, Pevsner, Rodin, Smith, and von Schlegell.
For the past decade Mr. Hirshhorn has been known as one of the nation's most generous lenders and the collection is a major source for museums and art historians preparing retrospective exhibitions, biogra- phies, and catalogues raisonnes of twentieth-century artists. In 1968 more than fifty queries were received weekly for research information, loans, photographs, or permission to view specific works. Although, due to limited physical facilities, only two hundred visiting scholars, artists, and officials could be greeted at the collection office and warehouse in New York, more than five hundred paintings and sculptures from the collection were loaned to museums and galleries throughout the world, notably to the Dada exhibition at New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles, to the de Kooning, Hooper, and Hepworth retrospectives, the Pittsburgh International, to three exhibits at the Smithsonian galleries in Wash- ington, and to the Tovish Retrospective in New York.
This year has seen considerable expansion in the Institution's inter- national activities which have passed under the direction of David Challinor. William Warner, first director of this office, has moved to become Acting Assistant Secretary for Public Service. In the four years that he has served in international activities, Mr. Warner has served the Smithsonian brilliantly; his prior knowledge gained from the De- partment of State and the Peace Corps has proved invaluable in re- asserting the Smithsonian's traditional interest in international research services and specialized cultural exchange.
Under David Challinor's energetic leadership, the Office of Inter- national Activities has initiated preliminary scientific and cultural agreements with several countries, notably with Tunisia and Iran. In addition Mr. Challinor's special interests in forestry and conservation have enabled him to negotiate agreements with the United Fruit Com- pany and the Organization for Tropical Studies for the development of the Lancetilla, Honduras, station of United Fruit Company, as an ecological research center, and to develop an agreement with the United States Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife for ecological research on St. Vincent Island off the west coast of Florida.
Dr. Caryl P. Haskins was appointed Chairman ad interim of the Ex- ecutive Committee (Permanent Committee). The present membership of the Board is given on page iii. The Board approved the appoint- ment during the year of Charles Blitzer as Assistant Secretary for His- tory and Art; William W. Warner as Acting Assistant Secretary for Public Service; Russell Shank as Director, Smithsonian Institution Li- braries; T. Ames Wheeler as Treasurer; Leonard B. Pouliot as Director, Personnel Division; and Frederic M. Philips as Director, Office of Pub- lic Affairs.
The annual meeting of the Board of Regents was held on 25 January 1968 in the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries Building at 9th and G Streets NW. The Board toured the restored building and previewed exhibitions being prepared for the formal opening of the building in May 1968. Dr. David Scott, Director of the National Collection of Fine Arts, and Charles Nagel, Director of the National Portrait Gallery, described their respective collections and galleries.
Dr. David E. Finley, first Director of the National Gallery of Art, on 19 July 1967 was awarded the Smithsonian's Henry Medal. Vice Presi- dent Hubert H. Humphrey, who made the presentation at ceremonies in the Great Hall, cited him for his distinguished service to the city of Washington and the nation over thirty years as "an arbiter of taste, a moulder of form, and a conservator of all that is eclectic."
The Hemy Medal — created in honor of Joseph Henr)', distinguished for his discoveries in electromagnetism and first Secretary of the Institu- tion (1846-1878) — was designed by William Barber, Engraver of the United States Mint, and his son, Charles E. Barber, following Secretary Henry's death. Dr. Finley is the first individual to be awarded the Medal by vote of the Regents of the Institution, though the first few struck were presented to Henry's friends and associates in 1879 on the first anniver- sary of his death.
Vice President Humphrey, Smithsonian Secretary Ripley, and Dr. David E. Finley, first director of the National Gallery of Art at the July ceremonies during which the Vice President presented the Smithsonian's Henry Medal to Dr. Finley. Right, Senator Claiborne Pell presents the Henry Medal to Frank A. Taylor of the Smithsonian in June.
Secretary Ripley termed Dr. Richardson — formerly Director of the Detroit Institute of Arts and the Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Museum and Chairman of the Smithsonian Art Commission until the end of 1967 — an "historian of American art without peer," and said: "Your contributions to the unravelling of the mysteries of the conduits, channels, bypasses and rivulets of the watershed of art history in its tangled skeins across the map of America have been fundamental to our understanding."
Dr. Richardson is the second Smithson Medal winner. Established in 1965, the medal was first awarded to the Royal Society of London dur- ing ceremonies marking the 200th anniversary of the birth of James Smithson.
Up to this year and continuing, we hope, for the future the Institu- tion's principal services for schools have been escorted tours for school- children, made possible by financial support and volunteer members from the Junior League of Washington, the Smithsonian Associates, and other organizations, who this year conducted visits for 30,352 children totaling 1,010 hours of instruction in Smithsonian museums and gal- leries. Throughout the week these ladies are to be found in the halls of the museums explaining the story of exhibits to enthralled groups of children. It is a pleasure to acknowledge the assistance of the chairman of Smithsonian volunteers, Mrs. George C. Gerber, and those members listed on page 38, who were presented certificates of accomplishment at a special recognition ceremony on 26 June.
Mrs. Marjorie Halpin. The second annual holiday lectures for Wash- ington area schoolchildren were given by Professor Vincent Scully of Yak University, a noted authority on the history of art and architecture and a compelling teacher. The public schools of the District of Co- lumbia have cooperated enthusiastically, even assigning teachers to summer work at the Smithsonian, where they have written, for use in museums, special course materials on such topics as the biology of re- production and the opening of the American west, as these may be studied through exhibits in the Museum of Natural History. An un- usual exhibition — conceived in the days following the assassination of Martin Luther King — presented children's drawings of the civil dis- turbances which occurred, accompanied by their own words about the events of that trying period. The exhibit was prepared by the Division staff under the guidance of Michael Sands, a talented designer from the Education Development Center of Cambridge, Massachusetts, who captured something of the stark feeling of social conflict by mounting the drawings on a simple backdrop of cardboard cartons. The exhibit helped to demonstrate the value of engaging schoolchildren in confron- tations with situations of social stress, from which the schools could not in any event have insulated them.
In May the noted British ecologist, Charles Elton, was named a Fellow of the Smithsonian Institution. This appointment enables him to conduct studies in animal ecology in Washington, but also at the special Area de Pesquisas Ecologicas do Guama field station near Belem, Brazil, operated with partial support from the Institution. Dr. Elton has retired as Director of the Bureau of Animal Population, which he founded in 1932, and has been Reader in Animal Ecology at the Uni- versity of Oxford.
Mrs. Ernest N. May, Jr., Chairman, Volunteer Advisory Board Mrs. John F. Forstmann, Assistant Chairman of Docents
Mrs. Daniel F. Johnson Mrs. Ardon B. Judd Mrs. Clyde V. Kelly, Jr. Mrs. Robert M. Kimzey, Jr. Mrs. Charles Klopf Mrs. Joseph P. Lorenz Mrs. Keith Magnus Mrs. John A. Manfuso, Jr. Mrs. Craig Mathews Mrs. Robert J. McEachern Mrs. John Munhall, HI Mrs. Frederick North, Jr. Mrs. John E. Packard, HI Mrs. Steuart Pittman Mrs. Barefoot Sanders Mrs. Richard F. Shryock Mrs. John A. Simmons Mrs. Richard B. Smith Mrs. John F. Snyder Mrs. Edwin F. Stetson Mrs. William R. Stratton Mrs. Larry Temple Mrs. Charles W. Turner Mrs. David Wysong
In February 1968 William W. Warner, the first director, who had successfully organized and guided the Office's activities, was appointed the Smithsonian's Acting Assistant Secretary for Public Service. He is succeeded by Acting Director David Challinor, who had originally joined the Office as Mr. Warner's deputy.
Secretary Ripley's visit to Tunisia in November, where he person- ally extended an invitation to President Bourguiba to visit the Smithso- nian, led to a major step forward in extending the Program's scope in that country. During President Bourguiba's visit in June, Dr. Ripley announced the acceptance by the Smithsonian of its role in a Tunisian- American research agreement soon to be signed by their governments-
Dialogues were begun in midyear with the librarians of several major branches to search for the fundamental issues that will serve as a basis for the subsequent preparation of policy statements on collection devel- opment. Miss Jean C. Smith, formerly assistant director of libraries, rejoined the staff to serve as a special assistant to the Director for biological science programs, with major emphasis on matters relating to the collections. Work was begun by a special task group on revi- talizing the collections of the branch that serves the Office of Anthropology. Duplicates and material that is out of scope are being discarded. The whole collection will be integrated through recataloging according to the Library of Congress classification. This project is an outstanding demonstration of the manner in which the serviceability of the rest of the Institution's library facilities can be improved.
Public affairs activities. A: George Berklacy at teletype machine; B: Margaret Dress dispensing leaflets; C: Mary Krug working on the Torch, the Smithsonian employees newspaper; D: Fredric M. Philips and Mrs. Morris Cafritz with model of a Calder sculpture during presentation ceremony.
The first exhibition in the new galleries of the National Collection of Fine Arts was a collection of posters assembled by Mrs. Albert List.
Among the non-Smithsonian museums assisted by the Office of Ex- hibits last year was the Children's Museum and Planetarium of Charles- town, West Virginia, where a workshop seminar was conducted by designer Mrs. Deborah Bretzfelder, special projects supervisor Eugene F. Behlen, and exhibits specialist Frank Y. Caldwell.
The exhibits editor's office, under its new chief, Mrs. Constance Minkin, in addition to its primary functions of editing exhibits labels and overseeing their typography and printing, participated in such exhibits-related activities as preparing the scripts for the audiovisual program, and prepared or assisted with such items for the visiting public as five exhibition brochures, a guide map to the Museum of Natu- ral History, and a comprehensive Smithsonian-wide exhibits direc- tory — all published last year — and completing the manuscript for a guidebook to the hall of philately. Also, work was begun on a guide- book for the Museum of Natural History. Of the 7,614 labels edited, 5,880 were printed for 90 exhibitions in 24 permanent and 66 tempo- rary halls. The remainder awaits printing.
A newly acquired spectacular gold chalice was added to the gem hall (to be shown intermittently, by arrangement with the donor). A new complex of gem cases was planned by designer Dorothy Guthrie, and special exhibits were installed for the mammoth Lesotho diamond, twinned diamond crystals, a 31 -carat heart-shaped blue diamond, and a collection of jade carvings. Nearly half of the exhibits have been com- pleted for the hall of physical geology, designed by Mrs. Guthrie and produced and installed under the direction of Frank Nelms, chief of the production section, and assistant chief Charles W. Mickens.
About three years ago the Smithsonian's division of mechanical and civil engineering, aware that the rate of abandonment and demolition was increasing as a result of obsolescence, urban sprawl, highway con- struction, and other disruptive economical and physical factors, under- took a series of recording surveys to increase the breadth of this direct documentation of American industrial survivals. In the first survey, in July 1965, the C. P. Bradway Machine Works was thoroughly recorded. This small Connecticut factory had just ceased the manufacture of water turbines. Its buildings, production machinery, and — most im- portantly — its manufacturing methods were an unusual survival of a typical late- 19th-century machine manufactory, for since its founding in 1889, few of its major physical or operational elements had been drastically altered. The three-man party that surveyed it in one week made complete measurements of the building and its contents. With a tape recorder and 35-mm. camera, they produced a step-by-step account of the entire turbine-manufacturing sequence as recounted by Mr. Bradway, the elderly owner and son of the firm's founder. It was virtually a craft process, and most of the dimensional and manufacturing information existed nowhere but in Mr. Bradway's memory, an ex- tremely common method of record keeping in the early days of the turbine and other light, limited-production machine industries.
Jon Eklund joined the staff as assistant curator of chemistry and Audrey Davis as assistant curator of medicine. Eklund is working on early 19th- century experimental techniques; Mrs. Davis is studying the develop- ment of medical chemistry in the 17th century. Deborah Warner was appointed assistant curator of astronomy and meteorology and is con- tinuing her research on late- 19th-century astrophysics. Assistant curator Sandra Herbert worked on new methods of presenting the history of science in exhibits.
At the "Copp Family Textiles" exhibit, Mrs. Helene Bress, a local weaver, dem- onstrates how a blue and white check linen was made. At right, fringes and the implements used in their making.
Associate curator of textiles Rita J. Adrosko continued her research on shawls and European folk origins of American coverlets with one month's official leave in England, Scotland, Belgium, Germany, and The Netherlands. She also examined important manuscripts on weaving and dyeing in Pennsylvania collections. Mrs. Grace R. Cooper, curator, examined numerous spinning wheels in New England collections in her research on the spinning wheel in America. She also initiated work on a second volume on the history of sewing machines; this one to continue the history from 1875 to 1925. Museum specialist Doris M. Bowman was on one month's official leave researching the collections and libraries of New England in her continuing study of lace and needlework.
Watkins returned from a sabbatical leave, during which he studied American folk pottery under a grant from the Smithsonian Research Foundation. In a collaborative project related to these studies, Mrs. Jacqueline Olin, research chemist in the conservation analytical lab- oratory, has been at the Brookhaven National Laboratory conducting neutron-activation analysis of sherds from certain historic sites.
Mrs. Betty Walters completed a manuscript on patented desks and other specialized office furniture made in the third quarter of the 19th centur)^ The Termatrex data-retrieval program, which she has furthered, now covers more than 5,900 objects, permitting the use of this system to provide immediate information in many combinations.
In October Mrs. Clain-Stefanelli participated as United States rep- resentative in the 12th Congress of the International Federation of the Medal in Paris and arranged for an exhibit at the Paris Mint of medals engraved by 38 American artists in the period 1960-1967. Her proposal to publish "Medailles" as a bilingual periodical with French and English texts, thus contributing to a larger distribution in English- speaking countries, was adopted by the Congress. The first bilingual issue is in preparation.
There has been increasing participation by research grantees and outside investigators. Frederick Fried, an authority on American folk sculpture in wood, provided a detailed report and analysis of folk carv- ings in the collections. Mrs. Maureen Cole, a member of the stafT of the Henry Francis duPont Winterthur Museum, spent most of the year photographing and recording 18th-century objects for the Winterthur Museum's nationwide index of American decorative arts. Research fellow Carroll Greene participated in the research and exhibition pro- gram commemorating the American Revolution and collaborated in planning exhibits on Afro-American culture.
In medical sciences, new additions were : an early Julius H. Hess infant oxygen unit for premature infants; a rare Egyptian sacred amulet with multiple eyes (about 600 B.C.), gift from E. R. Squibb & Sons, Inc.; an original prototype dermatone for cutting skin grafts in the treatment of severe wounds and similar injuries, invented by George J. Hood in cooperation with Earl C. Padgett; a 1925 Tycos recording sphygmomanometer for measuring blood pressure in the arteries; an original stapling apparatus for small blood vessels invented by Dr. Julian A. Sterling; and about 45 Japanese medical, pharmaceutical, and dental antiques from the Tokugawa Shogunate period ( 1603-1867) .
To the ceramics and glass collections came 20 pieces of 18th-century European and Oriental porcelain from Dr. Hans Syz; especially note- worthy was a fine Chantilly bowl, circa 1740, decorated in Kakiemon style. Mrs. Florence E. Bushee donated 27 rare 19th-century European and American paperweights, and The Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia donated a splendid collection of sixty 20th-century porce- lain birds manufactured by Edward Marshall Boehm, Trenton, New Jersey. The latter collection, originally given to the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia by Mr. and Mrs. Morris Gastwirth, was trans- ferred to the Smithsonian Institution with their kind permission.
From Mrs. Harold G. Duckworth came a unique collection of 720 19th-century American pressed-glass cup plates which comprise an index collection and are most important in documenting the history of the American glass industry. From Eugene D. Buchanan, five important 1 8th-century ceramics were received, including an extremely interesting Leeds cream-colored earthenware teapot; and from Mr. and Mrs. Edward M. Pflueger, five pieces of 18th-century European porcelain and faience. Outstanding in this gift is a Hochst porcelain, Italian comedy figure dating about 1755. From Mrs. Nathan Cummings came a most unusual English Jackfield jug, circa 1750, beautifully painted
Gifts of special interest were a tricolor "one-shot" Color-Scout camera from Fairchild Graphic Equipment; an early Ives Kromskop three- color stereoscopic viewer with a set of Kromogram color-separation slides, from Mrs. Herbert E. Ives.; and four cameras built for specialized applications in high-speed photography, from their designer, a pioneer in the field of high-speed photography, J. S. Courtney-Pratt. The pho- tographer Daniel Farber also donated a group of his dye-transfer color prints, and five prints were acquired from the photographer John Brook.
Important broadening of the scope of the collections has resulted from associate curator Richard E. Ahlbom's research in Spanish colonial areas. The gift by Mrs. Otto Pike of 47 religious figures by the Puerto Rican folk sculptor, Pedro de Arce, enriched a group of nearly 100 other Puerto Rican carved santos also acquired this year. From New Mexico came several examples of native religious sculptures and Penitente cult objects, including a 19th-century death cart used in Penitente cere- monies. Staff members of the Museum of New Mexico restored several retablos and a rare 18th-century Franciscan hide painting of San An- tonio that has been in the Smithsonian collections for nearly a century. These additions and upgradings of our Spanish colonial materials are significant of the Smithsonian's increasing recognition of America's cultural diversity.
Mrs. Marjorie Merriweather Post's gift of a gold chalice encrusted with more than 1,350 diamonds, made in St. Petersburg by Iver Winfeldt Buch in 1791 for Catherine the Great, belongs among the Museum's most splendid rarities. In connection with curator C Malcolm Watkins' research numerous examples of 19th-century American folk pottery, including many decorative stoneware pieces from New York State, were acquired for the collections by collaborator Joan Pearson Watkins. A group of contemporary baskets showing residual African culture traits, made at John's Island, South Carolina, was collected by research fel- low Carroll Greene.
Among numerous items associated with the Wheeler family of Bridge- port, Connecticut, donated by Miss Ellen Wheeler, were nine impor- tant architectural drawings for the Harral- Wheeler House by the 19th- century architect Alexander Jackson Davis. Two side chairs and a sofa in the gothic-revival style from this house were given by Mrs. William P. Finney.
Ralph E. Becker and assistant curator Herbert R. Collins looking at a portion of the Ralph E. Becker collection of political Amer- icana which Mr. Becker has been donating to the Smithsonian since 1960.
Ralph E. Becker of Washington, D.C., continuing his generous contri- butions to the political-history collections, gave a gold pocket watch, tie chain, and poker chips used by Franklin D. Roosevelt. Other dona- tions of Presidential memorabilia were a black woolen shawl worn by Abraham Lincoln, gift of Mrs. Shirley Wood; a book of trout flies used by Grover Cleveland, given by his son Richard Cleveland; and a cup and saucer used by William McKinley just before his assassination in 1901, gift of Mrs. Louis Antonsanti. From the Society of the Oldest Inhabitants of Washington, D.C., came an original 1819 desk used in the House of Representatives and a double desk of the House of Repre- sentatives designed by Thomas U. Walter in 1857. Other objects in- cluded a gold lorgnette and vanity case owned by Mary Todd Lincoln, gift of Lincoln Isham ; a dress worn by Harriet Lane Johnston, niece and hostess for James Buchanan, 1857-1861, gift of the Misses Elizabeth Gray, Juliana Paca, and Margaret Beverly Taylor; and the brooch "Our Mineral Heritage," given by the executive committee of the 1967
National Gem and Mineral Show. A portrait of Emily Donelson, hostess for Andrew Jackson, by R. E. W. Earle, was lent by Mrs. Charlton Henry, and a portrait of Maria Monroe Gouvemeur, daughter of James Monroe, by an unknown artist, was lent by Mr. and Mrs. Harris E. Kirk, Jr.
Portraits of James and Dolley Madison and of Mrs. Catherine Crop- per were restored, and the recording of dresses of the First Ladies con- tinued with the completion of patterns, muslin models, and sewing instructions for the dresses of Mrs. Ellen Wilson and Mrs. Edith Roosevelt.
The receipt from Mr. Jon Holtzman of a hoard consisting of 1,502 early 15th-century Ottoman akchehs was one of the determining factors in establishing a special Islamic section with the help of Raymond Hebert.
Significant additions to the United States series included a collection of 109 Connecticut 18th-century cents (dated 1785-1788) donated by Theodore L. Craige. Mrs. F. C. C. Boyd gave a rare gold-assay ingot of Knight and Company, Marysville, California, bringing to three the number of American ingots in the Smithsonian collections.
Mr. and Mrs. Mortimer Neinken donated 58 mostly very rare 19th- century treasury bills issued by German states and banking institutions as well as 1 1 2 notes which fomierly circulated in German colonies and a specialized collection of 968 German post- World War I "pegged-value" currency issues, which are of great importance to students of financial history.
In the areas of philately and postal history, the Reverend Floyd S. Leach's collection of 1,454,604 stamps and covers was acquired as a bequest from the estate of Mrs. Harriett M. Leach. It includes three volumes of rare American Expeditionary Force covers from North Russian and Siberia, 1918-1920; a significant group of covers carried by balloons during the siege of Paris, 1870-1871, together with three rare "pellicules" — microfilm messages — carried by pigeons during the siege ; and a very extensive collection of United States stamps and postal markings. John F. Rider, again enriching the European postal-history portion of the collections, donated a letter posted in Barcelona in 1344. An embossed revenue stamp issued by the colonial government of Mas- sachusetts, applied to a document on the first efTective date of the act —
Notable additions to the national collection of naval uniforms in- cluded a white service dress uniform, worn by Seaman Harry T. Ben- nett during the Civil War. Enlisted men's uniforms of the Spanish- American War era were received from Mrs. Caroline W. Budinger, Mrs. James E. Ross and Herbert L. Crook. Mrs. Ethel R. Edson donated the uniforms of Major General Merritt A. Edson, USMC.
Clain-Stefanelli, Vladimir. "Ancient Gold Coinage of Kallatis." Paper read 29 August by Mrs. Clain-Stefanelli at the International Numismatic Congress, Copenhagen.
In February, the division of engineering sponsored a showing of American artist Ranulph Bye's watercolors of 19th-century railroad stations. Mr. Bye has presented 15 of the paintings to the Museum. They are not only accurate architectural documents, but of great artistic merit as well. An outstanding spring event was the joint sponsorship by the division and the Society of Architectural Historians (Washington chapter) of a lecture: "Industrial Archeology — Whose Benefit, Whose Responsibility?" by Kenneth Hudson of the Bath University of Tech- nology. The lecture was followed by a joint Smithsonian-Historic Amer- ican Buildings Survey show of drawings and photographs tided "Recent Projects in Industrial Archeology."
Mrs. Alice Roosevelt Longworth, daughter of President Theodore Roosevelt, and assistant curator Herbert R. Collins at the opening of the "Pastimes of the Presidents" exhibit, 15 September 1967. In the foreground is a Nile Lechwi, a type of antelope, brought down by Theodore Roosevelt during a Smithsonian expedition to Africa.
In January an exhibit of photos and artifacts dealing with 18th- and 19th-century organbuilding was presented in conjunction with a concert and a lecture by Miss Barbara Owen. An experimental temporary exhibit representative of musical instruments from the collection marks the beginning of a docent program and of trials for several new exhibit techniques. These include the use of chairs equipped with stereophonic speakers through which concert tapes are played.
The "Retrospective Exhibit of the American Medal," sponsored by the Medallic Art Company in New York, set up under the direction of Mrs. E. Clain-Stefanelli, marked the celebration of the 75th anniversary of the National Sculpture Society.
An in-depth study of naval aviation development during the first decade after World War I, focusing on the contributions of Admiral William Moff"ett and DeWitt C. Ramsey, is being undertaken by his- torian Richard K. Smith. This is the first historical research project to be supported by the Admiral DeWitt C. Ramsey memorial fund, which came to the National Air and Space Museum in the form of a substantial bequest from Mrs. Ramsey's estate.
Culver, Mrs. Paul: Magnetic compass and map of D.C.-Norfolk, Virginia; used by Paul Culver in flying the mail, 1918 (nasm 1941).
Page, Mrs. Stanley H. : Control wheel with column, lever and collection of spark plugs; from the Page Flying Boat, 1918-1923 (nasm 1870).
Among the many objects of exceptional quality added to the collection were, in Chinese art, a fine jade incised blade dating from the Late East- em Chou dynasty (68.38), presented by Mrs. Eugene Meyer in ac- cordance with the will of Charles Lang Freer, and a bronze hu of the Han dynasty (67.27). In Japanese art were added an unusual pair of paintings of mynah birds by the Nanga school artist Yosa Buson (1716- 1783) (67.18-67.19) and a large, shallow dish, an exceptional example of Kutani ware, dating from the Edo period, 17th century (68.13) ; and in Near Eastern art, a rare pair of Persian bowls from Kashan, early 13th century, with representations of a king and queen (67.24-67.25) . Under the terms of paragraph 4 of the first codicil to the last will and testament of the late Charles Lang Freer, the following 40 objects were presented by Mrs. Eugene Meyer:
Takashi Sugiura, the Gallery's mounter of oriental pictures, and an assistant, Mrs. Kumi Kinoshita, select a mounting cloth for a Japanese painting.
On 26 October 1967, a ceremony celebrating the coronation of His Imperial Majesty Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, Shahanshah of Iran, and Her Imperial Majesty The Empress Farah Diba was held in the audi- torium. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey and Ambassador of Iran and Mrs. Ansary attended, along with many other distinguished guests. Following this, a special exhibition of Iranian art was opened in the galleries.
The dedication ceremony for the new galleries of the National Collec- tion of Fine Arts took place at 9 : 30 p.m., 3 May. Seated under the elms in the courtyard on that warm spring evening were 3,318 guests. The Sec- retary, having recounted the history of the National Collection, intro- duced President Johnson, who characterized himself as feeling "very much like a proud uncle to the National Collection." He added, "If I will never be remembered as a patron of the arts, I should be delighted to be known as an uncle of the arts ... one who doesn't visit often but likes his relatives to do well." Then the President and Mrs. Johnson were escorted through the galleries by the Secretary and Mrs. Ripley. The red-coated Marine Corps Band played for the moonlit courtyard ceremony, and, during the reception following the formal dedication, the New England String Quartet played in the assembly room.
Under provisions of the revised bylaws, which were approved by the Smithsonian Board of Regents in January, the following new members were announced at the spring meeting of the Commission on 3 May: William A. M. Burden, Regent of the Smithsonian Institution and art collector; Martin Friedman, Director of the Walker Art Center; Thomas Howe, Director Emeritus of the Palace of the Legion of Honor ; Mrs. J. Lee Johnson, President of the Board of the Amon Carter Mu- seum of Western Art; Samuel C. Johnson, business executive, collector, and patron; and Mrs. Otto L. Spaeth, writer, collector, and patron. The resignations of Paul Mellon and Stow Wengenroth were also an- nounced at the special spring meeting.
The library's plan to develop a study center for American art in Washington comes closer to realization as a result of the year's events. The total number of 3400 reference uses made of the library represents an increase of 57 percent over the figure reported during the previous fiscal year. Notable additions to the library collections were received from Mrs. Adelyn D. Breeskin, Stefan Munsing, Dr. and Mrs. David Scott, Mr. and Mrs. Tessim Zorach, and the Washington Gallery of Modern Art.
Summer by Mrs. W. H. Holmes covered by an opaque bloom caused b steam pipe; right, after cleaning and revarnishing in the conservation la
Chief of the International Art Program Lois Bingham and assistant Betty Jo Abel traveled to Brazil twice, to install and to dismantle the American exhibition at the IX Sao Paulo Bienal. Miss Bingham made survey trips to Latin American countries to arrange for circulation of the exhibition, "The New Vein," and in Italy, with deputy chief Mar- garet Cogswell, she installed the American exhibition at the XXXIV Venice Biennale. In Czechoslovakia and Romania she arranged for the show, "The Disappearance and Re-Appearance of the Image," which was in Romania under the United States-Romanian Cultural Exchange Agreement for 1968. She also juried the annual exhibition of the Acad- emy of Fine Arts in Easton, Maryland.
Under Mrs. Mary Nell Sherman, special service activities focused on the NCFA opening and included a community relations program, under which the Director's preview tour for over thirty-five commercial neighbors resulted in twenty imaginative store windows honoring the opening. The plans for the opening provided for invitations, hostesses, a press room, establishing complete invitational lists, as well as a White House tour for major donors, and dinner parties at the Italian and Brazilian Embassies for out-of-town guests.
The volunteer staff for the opening included Miss Ruth Oviatt, a retired writer and editor who wrote the major part of the press kit; Mrs. John Durrell, who worked on community relations; Mrs. Huston Coiner III, who carried out a new liaison program with guidebooks, convention bureaus, usis missions and map companies; Mrs. Ellis Lyons, who planned an extensive educational program for schools and libraries; Mrs. Robert Kintner, who organized pre-opening dinner par- ties for 350 out-of-town guests; and Mrs. Angel Byrne, who aided with the logistics of the opening. Two dozen additional volunteers, most from the Smithsonian Ladies Committee, accomplished vital work such as addressing invitations and mailing posters to museums.
A number of research projects were carried on despite the heavy de- mands of preparation for opening the museum. Mrs. Pamela AUara pre- pared a paper on the art career of the National Collection's first director, William Henry Holmes. Curator Adelyn D. Breeskin made important progress on her monumental study of Mary Cassatt and hopes to com- plete her "Catalogue Raisonee" by the end of the year. She also began intensive study of Milton Avery's paintings in preparation for next year's exhibition.
In addition, scholars were brought to the National Collection of Fine Arts for special projects. A study of exterior sculpture in the District of Columbia by Bruce Moore and Michael Richmann was carried to a conclusion. Professor William Gerdts made a study of the 19th-century American sculpture in the National Collection. Mrs. Selma Rein re- searched 19th- and 20th-century legislation on the planning, erecting, and maintaining of the Old Patent Office building, as source material for a small booklet on the monumental building which now houses the Collection.
The task of equipping the building has been formidable. We were fortunate, however, to have received some ten thousand dollars, con- tributed in his memory by friends and former clients of the late Victor Proetz. This sum enabled us to secure a number of 18th- and 19th- century antiques. These give a special air to the administrative suite which has been made a memorial to Mr. Proetz, who was its designer. Also, from drawings of furniture designed by him selections were made for manufacture by his cabinet maker of many "working pieces" for the commission room, the Reception Room, and the offices. Four hand- some cases for large books — two high and two low — were willed to the Gallery and serve as theme pieces. These, from the hand of Mr. Proetz, for many years had graced his apartment. They now add greatly to the character of the reception room. For her help in securing both antique and contemporary pieces, we are much indebted to Miss Elinor Merrell of New York who was generous to us in every way in this felicitous achievement.
During the six months of the past year that historian Daniel J. Reed was absent on leave as deputy director of the National Advisory Commission on Libraries, his duties were ably assumed by his assistant, Mrs. Virginia Purdy. She has since been made acting keeper of the catalogue and has rendered valiant service in the preparation of
Nine volunteers have continued to help at various tasks in the Gallery and library: Mrs. Marian Carroll, Mrs. Helen Elder, Mrs. Helen Jones, Mrs. Cynthia McKelvie, Mrs. Charles Nagel, Miss Gabrielle Pirandoni, Mrs. Bryson Brennan Rash, Mrs. Tobie Savoie, and Mrs. Stuart Symington. It is hoped that this number of most welcome workers will be increased in the fall by a group of volunteer docents with whom preliminary orientation discussions have already begun.
Only one major change in our small staff has taken place : Mrs. Helen Maggs Fede, who, as keeper of the catalogue, came to the Gallery in November with a fine record of curatorial and research duties per- formed at Mt. Vernon, the Museum of History and Technology, and Blair House, after only two months on the staff, died suddenly, in February 1968, of a heart attack. It is seldom that one finds a person whose qualifications and duties coincide so completely and her loss is keenly felt.
President Benjamin Harrison, on left, by Eastman Johnson (1824-1906). Draw- ing heightened with chalk, ca. 1889. (NPG 68.4) Right, Henry Cabot Lodge, by John Singer Sargent (1856-1925). Oil on canvas, 1890. Gift of the Honorable and Mrs. Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. (NPG 68.58)
A bust of the late Helen Keller, by Jo Davidson, was one of a series of fine likenesses purchased from the estate of the artist; Henry Cabot Lodge depicted by John Singer Sargent was an important gift from the grandson of the Senator and his wife, the Honorable and Mrs. Henry Cabot Lodge. Mrs. Alice Silliman Hawkes gave us a portrait of Ben- jamin Silliman, the distinguished early 19th-century scientist and nephew-in-law of John Trumbull, the painter of this small portrait. Finally, a painting of Daniel Webster by Chester Harding came to the collections as a most welcome gift from Mrs. Gerald Burwell Lambert.
Johnson, Lyndon Baines Jones, John Paul Joseph, Chief Keller, Helen Kennedy, John P. Kent, James Kent, Mrs. James
Fine Arts National Gallery of Art National Gallery of Art Mrs. Herbert E. Ives National Gallery of Art Mrs. Robert McCormick National Gallery of Art Mrs. Thomas Curtis
Preparations for the opening exhibition have constituted a major part of the work of the history department in the past year. Having selected for it the title, "This New Man : A Discourse in Portraits," the historians have worked with Mr. Townsend on the selection of sitters to develop the theme, and with Curator Robert G. Stewart on what portraits were available for the show. The catalogue, which is to be a beautiful book of lasting importance, has entailed considerable biographical research. Under the editorial supervision of Mr. Townsend, a caption for each sitter as well as introductory statements for each gallery and group of
The Catalogue of American Portraits, now housed in convenient storage units, is being used by the staffs of this Gallery and other Smith- sonian bureaus as well as by occasional visiting scholars. In addition, the number of reference letters grows. Equipment has been installed to prepare the data in the Catalogue for computer processing. After the sudden death of Mrs. Fede, Mrs. Virginia C. Purdy became acting keeper. Mrs. Mona C. Dearborn, a permanent though part-time cata- loguer of the Catalogue of American Portraits, has been assisted in her work by one volunteer, Mrs. McKelvie, and several able temporary employees.
He is serving as chairman of the local arrangements committee for the 1968 convention of the American Association for State and Local History which meets in Washington in September 1968. He is also a member of the professional advisory committee of the Archives of American Art. He and Mrs. Purdy attended the Museum Computer Conference in April at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City.
Mrs. Virginia Purdy was the author of "The Catalogue of American Portraits" published in Picturescope (vol. 15, 1967), and prepared a new edition of the general brochure on the Gallery. Director Charles
The prints and photographs collection was augmented by prints, given to the National Portrait Gallery by the Library of Congress, from 4000 glass-plate negatives made by Harris and Ewing. Mrs. Genevieve Kennedy Stephenson incorporated these into the collection with the volunteer assistance of Mrs. Cynthia McKelvie, Mrs. Charles Nagel, and Mrs. Stuart Symington.
The library enlarged its physical facilities considerably this year, replac- ing old and inadequate shelving with new wood and steel stacks and adding other basic equipment. The use of the library represents an in- crease of 57 percent over the figure previously reported. Additions to the collection came largely through donations: Mrs. Adelyn Breeskin, Stefan Munsing, Dr. David Scott, Mr. and Mrs. Tessrin Zorach, and the Wash- ington Gallery of Modern Art. During the year, one publication ex- change mailing consisting of five National Collection of Fine Arts publi- cations and two National Portrait Gallery titles were sent to 248 institutions here and abroad.
For the past decade Mr. Hirshhorn has been known as one of the nation's most generous lenders. The Collection is a major source for museums and art historians preparing retrospective exhibitions, biogra- phies, or catalogues raisonnes of twentieth-century artists. In 1968 more
On 25 May, Mr. Lerner was interviewed by WCBS-TV News on "Art Collecting Today." In 1968, among other activities, he continued to serve on the New York Advisory Board of the Archives of American Art. Miss JafTee served as a consultant to the New York State Council on the Arts. In April, all staflF members attended the Museum Computer Conference at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
America Fifty-Fifth Annual Meeting, 1968. . "Mr. Hirshhorn and his Collection." Foreword to The Friends of
Mrs. Metcalf Bowler, by John Singleton Copley (American, 1738-1815). Canvas, 50 X 40 '/4 inches. Gift of Louise Allda Livingston. At right, Portrait of a Woman, artist unknown (American, painted about 1840). Canvas, 30 x 34 inches. Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch.
Gifts of money and securities were made by Avalon Foundation; Mrs. Angier Biddle Duke; J. I. Foundation, Inc.; Mrs. Ailsa Mellon Bruce; H. Arthur Klein; Samuel H. Kress Foundation; Medici Society, Ltd.; The A. W. Mellon Educational and Charitable Trust; Paul Mel- lon; Old Dominion Foundation; Lila Acheson Wallace Fund, Inc.; and others.
Dr. Bouton gave five lectures over the telephone to classrooms in schools in Arlington, Virginia, and in Youngstown, Ohio. Slides of Gallery paintings had been sent to the schools. Question and answer periods followed the telephone lectures.
The orchestra performed at special concerts, including a performance at the White House following a State dinner in honor of Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany and Mrs. Kiesinger, on 15 August 1967; and at the dedication of restored Ford's Theater on 21 January 1968.
The National Gallery of Art provided facilities for the ceremony held by the Post Office Department on 2 November 1967 — the first day of issue of a postage stamp in the Fine Arts Series. The stamp is based on the painting by Thomas Eakins, The Biglin Brothers Racing, which was given to the Gallery by Mr. and Mrs. Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney.
Previous to the annual meeting Daniel W. Bell notified Mr. Stevens that he was retiring as Treasurer, a position Mr. Bell had held since the establishment of the Center. At the annual meeting, Mr. Bell was elected Treasurer Emeritus, an office created in recognition of his "dedication, counsel and tireless work since 1958." Mr. Bell was for- merly Assistant Secretary of the Treasury and returned to private life to serve as president and chairman of the board of the American Se- curity and Trust Company of Washington.
At the annual meeting Mrs. George A. Garrett, Mrs. Albert D. Lasker, and Mrs. Jouett Shouse, Trustees of the Center, were reappointed, to serve on the National Council of the Friends of the Kennedy Center.
Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, Mrs. John F. Kennedy, and Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower continue to serve as honorary co-chairmen of the Center.
Mr. Blair, who assumed duties on 1 April, most recently served as United States Ambassador to the Philippines. As General Direc- tor, he is responsible for administration, including budget, congres- sional relations, promotion, fund-raising, and educational activities.
Mr. Rudel, who has been chief conductor and general conductor of the New York City Opera since 1957, will review the musical program for the Center and will be responsible for the final recom- mendations to the Trustees of the artistic groups that will appear in the concert hall and opera.
During his long association with the New York City Opera, Mr. Rudel has gained a reputation for championing contemporary works to a degree unique among operatic enterprises. The opera company is also known for its excellent Mozart repertoire.
The Kennedy Center suffered another grievous loss in the sudden death on 17 June of Howard F. Ahmanson, who was appointed a trus- tee in 1963 by President Kennedy. Mr. Ahmanson, a noted California financier, philanthropist, and art collector, was principal owner of the Los Angeles-based Home Savings and Loan Association.
The next day's session at the Smithsonian Institution included a busi- ness meeting, speeches by William McC. Blair, Jr., and Miss Peggy Wood, and a panel discussion, "The Performing Arts and the Community." Members of the panel, which was chaired by Mr. Ralph Burgard, Director of Associated Council of the Arts, were Mrs. William Mitchell, Chairman of the Education Program of the Chicago Lyric Opera, Mrs. Agnew Hunter Bahnson, Jr., President of the North Carolina State Art Society, Miss Gladys Douglas-Longmore, Director of the Hospitalized Veterans Service of the Musicians Emergency Fund, and Miss Katherine Dunham, dancer and educator.
The Speakers Bureau, under the joint chairmanship of Mrs. Eugene Carusi and Mrs. Frederick Mascioli, fulfilled engagements to organiza- tions not only in the District but as far away as Louisiana and North Carolina. A slide lecture was presented at a meeting of sixty foreign
Erich Leinsdorf, music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and a Trustee of the Center, spoke during the ceremony on 29 January celebrating completion of the steel framework of the Concert Hall. Left to right are Ralph E. Becker, General Counsel and a Trustee of the Center; Ambassador Arne Gunneng of Norway whose country has presented crystal chandeliers for the Concert Hall; Mrs. Polk Guest, chairman of the Friends of the Kennedy Center; Mr. Leinsdorf; and (partially hidden) Daniel W. Bell, Treasurer Emeritus of the Center.
One major project of the Friends is the American College Theatre Festival to be held in Washington 27 April to 12 May 1969 at Ford's Theatre and at a theatre on the Mall. The Friends' participa- tion as a co-sponsor with American Airlines and the Smithsonian In- stitution was undertaken at the suggestion of Mr. Stevens. It was felt that the Festival reflected both artistic and educational aspects and was an ideal pilot program for the Friends. A total of 192 colleges and universities have entered the contest.
During a testimonial dinner held last January for Patrick Hayes, Washington impressario, it was announced that Mr. Hayes' friends had collected $2,500 to decorate in his honor the green room of the Concert Hall. The green room is a reception room near the stage placed at the disposal of guest artists.
In January 1967, Dr. Sidney Caller, Assistant Secretary (Science) of the Smithsonian Institution, wrote a memo to Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Direc- tor, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, in which he stated:
National Science Foundation vessel Eltanin ( 1 ) , in the edge of the Antarc- tic ice, served as a base for studies of midwater organisms by Robert H. Gibbs and associates. Ocean Systems, Inc., Deep Diver (2), oai Edwin A. Link's oceanographic yacht Sea Diver in the Bahamas, was used in underwater experiments by Clyde F. E. Roper and associates. J. Seward Johnson's yacht Ocean Pearl (3), in the straits of Florida, was used as a diver support vessel with Deep Diver in underwater experiments of Clyde F. E. Roper and associates. University of Maryland vessel Orion (4), in Chesapeake Bay, was used by Miss McLaughlin and associates for curatorial research in the Sorting Center.
Mrs. Mariel King's yacht Pele (15), loading at a Polynesian port, served as a support ship for collections of mol- lusks by Harald A. Rehder. Westinghouse submersible Deep Star 4000 (16), on a demonstration dive, was made available by the Naval Oceanographic Office to Robert H. Gibbs and associates for familiarization and fisheries research dives in the Northwest Atlantic. Edwin A. Link's oceanographic yacht Sea Diver (17), in the Bahamas, was used in a diving project involving about 20 scientists under the opera- tional direction of I. E. Wallen. University of Miami R/V Pilsbury (18), was used by H. Adair Fehlman and David M. Damkaer for plankton collection in June 1968. The Mote Marine Laboratory R/V Rhincodon, used for research on shark parasites, is shown on page 334.
At present the director, benthos supervisor Jose M. Stirn, and Mme. J. H. Heldt, permanent consultant, are training the technicians in all cate- gories of sorting. Among the technicians recently employed are two who will fill supervisory positions. One, Mme, Hedia Baccar, earned a D.Sc. from University of Lausanne in 1967. The other, Mr. Abdeloud Ghanem, has a degree in the natural sciences from the University of Tunis. These two plus Mme. Fafani Ouachi, who also has a natural science degree from the University of Tunis, make it possible for three of the four supervisory positions at mm so to be filled by Tunisians. Two Tunisians, Hassouni Zaoui and Mohamed Shili, are being trained to occupy subsupervisory positions.
In June the second Summer Institute in Systematics, this one for botani- cal systematists, was initiated with the collaboration of the American Society of Plant Taxonomists and with support provided by the National Science Foundation and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research. Curator of plant anatomy Richard H. Eyde served as the director of the symposium with Mrs. Sally W. Yochelsbn as the administrative assistant.
The study of disappearing traditional crafts, industries, and technolo- gies of South Asia continued, in collaboration with the University of New South Wales, Australia, under support from Public Law 480 and Smith- sonian research funds. Professor Hans Wulff, accompanied by Donald Godden and Charles F. Walton, began field work in November in Paki- stan. In December Dr. Wulff died of a cerebral hemorrhage in Khairpur, but Godden and Walton continued the expedition. These projects to gather collections and obtain data on the pre-industrial crafts of South Asia have been so successful that Chancellor Baxter of the University of New South Wales was asked to name Professor L. M. Haynes, who is head of the Department of Industrial Arts, as principal field investigator to carry out the long-range collaboration and fieldwork. Plans were developed for fieldwork in Ceylon by Professor Haynes, and in Pakistan by Godden and Walton on one team and by Smithsonian curator Eugene Knez on another.
Richard B. Woodbury completed a report on the prehistoric water- control systems in the Tehuacan Valley, Mexico, in collaboration with James A. Neely, University of Arizona, as part of the Tehuacan project of the R. S. Peabody Foundation, Andover, Massachusetts. He and Mrs. Woodbury, who is a research associate, in August and September in- itiated in the Zuni Valley, New Mexico, an intensive archeological reconnaissance designed to examine the ecology of prehistoric and recent use of land and resources.
The second event was the nineteenth annual meeting of the Lepi- dopterists' Society, 15-18 June, at which the division of Lepidoptera and Diptera was host. Invitational addresses were presented by Dr. H. B. D. Kettlewell of Oxford, England, and by Dr. H. E. Hinton of
A manuscript dealing with the distribution and phylogeny of the genus Cambarus, with an appended generic revision, was prepared by Horton H. Hobbs, Jr., for a conference on the distributional history of the biota of the southern Appalachians. Fieldwork was conducted on Dominica, and approximately a month was spent collecting crayfishes in Alabama, Georgia, and Mississippi. Studies on entocytherid ostracods, in collab- oration with Miss Margaret Walton, were continued at the Mountain Lake Biological Station. Hobbs, Percy C. Holt, and Miss Walton were the co-recipients of the J. Shelton Horsely Research Award of the Vir- ginia Academy of Science, in recognition of their joint paper, "The crayfishes and their epizootic ostracod and branchiobdellid associates of the Mountain Lake, Virginia, region."
Dr. Georgiana B. Deevey, Yale University, a Visiting Investigator in the Division of Crustacea, completed an account of six new species belonging to a new genus of halocyprid ostracod from the stomach contents of fish taken in deep water in the Gulf of Mexico. In addition, she has continued work on two other projects, the problem of the iden- tity of the cladoceran Bosmina from the southern hemisphere and its seasonal cyclomorphosis, and a year-round qualitative and quantitative study of the plankton of the Sargasso Sea.
Artist's rendering of Cobb Seamount, an extinct oceanic volcano which rises from a depth of 10,000 feet to within 110 feet of the sea surface. (Drawing courtesy of Dr. Thomas F. Budinger, Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, University of Cali- fornia, Berkeley.)
In addition, Robert Traub donated 58 specimens of fleas, a particu- larly valuable acquisition because it consisted of primary and secondary types. K. C. Emerson added over 3,000 slides of Mallophaga and Ano- plura from his personal collection and from Department of Defense sources. Dr. G. W. Rawson, a vounteer worker in the division of lepi- doptera and diptera, undertook the incorporation of several separate collections of Nearctic butterflies including his own, and has virtually finished the family Pieridae.
Steady growth of the mineral and gem collections continued. Among important gifts by individual donors were a number of fine sapphires of several colors by Mr. and Mrs. James H. Clark, a very rare 5.34- carat taafeite by Mr. and Mrs. Fred C. Kennedy, a 336-carat mass of industrial diamond by Nathan Fink, and an antique diamond necklace with a magnificent blue sapphire weighing 98.57 carats, gift of Countess
Other notable contributions include more than 5,000 Tertiary and Quaternary mollusks from an area between Isla de Margarita and Guajira Peninsula in Northern Venezuela collected by Thomas Waller, and some 2,000 specimens of a variety of Devonian invertebrates pre- sented by Dr. and Mrs. G. A. Cooper. Cooper also made extensive col- lections in the Guadelupe Mountains in continuance of his Permian studies.
Transfers from the Geological Survey included many type-specimens described by the staff of the paleontology and stratigraphy branch. Out- standing among these were 167 specimens of Foraminifera recovered from Tertiary and Recent samples from the Island of Guam and de- scribed by Ruth Todd. Approximately 150 additional Recent specimens from Alaska were described and received from Miss Todd. Calymenid trilobites described by Reuben Ross, Permian Tethyan fusulinids from California described by R. C. Douglass, and a large collection of Juras- sic ammonites described in U.S. Geological Survey Professional Papers 483D, 540, 573B by Ralph Imlay are indicative of the great diversity of specimens accessioned.
Fossil marine mammals have long been a major interest of the Mu- seum, particularly as a result of the tradition in their collection and study established and maintained by Remington Kellogg. The past year has been the most productive ever in terms of quantity and quality of acquisi- tions of marine mammals and other marine vertebrates. The major single accession of the year was that of the Douglas Emlong collection of fossil marine vertebrates, purchased through the Walcott fund. The col- lection consists mainly of remains of whales, porpoises, and sea lions, but includes as well desmostylians, birds, fishes, and turtles, virtually all collected by Mr. Emlong on the coast of Oregon. More than 500
One-day-old Masai giraffe Don- na and mother Marg. This baby was born 2 February and named for Mrs. Gilbert M. Grosvenor.
When buildings were completed for delicate-hoofed stock, the Zoo began to add to its antelope collection, which had never been large because oj lack of suitable quarters. With the acquisition of a female greater kudu, there is now a fine pair with excellent breeding prospects. Three Mrs. Gray's waterbuck were ordered, and while they were in the quaran tine station at Clifton, New Jersey, one of the females produced z fawn — ^an unexpected bonus for the Zoo.
On 4 January, Dr. Paul Leyhausen of the Max Planck Institut at Wuppertal, Germany, arrived for a month's stay, during which he and Eisenberg conducted obser\ations on the predatory behavior of several species of viverrids. In addition, films were made of the prey-catching behavior of the dasyurid marsupial Dasyuroides byrnei.
States Army Maintenance Division; Dr. R. G. Pearson, Canal Zone Veterinary Hospital; the officials of the Cristobal High School; and C. C. Soper of Eastman Kodak Company.
Dr. Te-Hsiu Ma cultur- ing bean roots for ex- periments to determine the effects of irradiated glucose solution on mi- totic chromosomes.
Resignations were received from David Tilles and Charles Bartlett md Leonard Solomon. Later during the year the Observatory was addened to receive news of the untimely death of Dr. Tilles.
The Honorable and Mrs. David Bruce The Honorable Douglas Dillon Mr. Charles E. Eckles The Honorable and Mrs. John Clifford Folger
Mr. Cornelius Van S. Roosevelt Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. P. A. B. Widener Mr. and Mrs. Sidney S. Zlotnick
Gilmore D. Clarke) VTrs. Frances A. Davila Vir. Henry F. du Pont ar. Newell W. EUison vIr. and Mrs. Richard S. Friedman vIr. Richard E. Fuller vIr. and Mrs. Hy Garfinkel vlr. George A. Garret kir. and Mrs. Crawford H. Greenewalt Ar. William Hershey Greer, Jr.
M. Burden Mrs. Jackson Burke Colonel and Mrs. D. Harold Byrd Mrs. Morris Cafritz Mr. and Mrs. G. Howland Chase Mr. Leon Chatelain, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. David Sanders Clark Mr. Thomas G. Corcoran Mr. William H. Crocker Mrs. Lilla B. Cummings Mrs. Chester Dale General and Mrs. Jacob L. Devers Mr. and Mrs. Ewen C. Dingwall Mr. and Mrs. Charles Eames Mr. Robert B. Eichholz Colonel Horace H. Figuers The Reverend Thomas R. Fitzgerald Mrs. Dielle Fleischmann Mr. and Mrs. Edward Foley Miss Mary S. Gardiner Mr. and Mrs. John T. Garrity Mr. T. Jack Gary, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Joseph T. Geuting, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. T. K. Glennan Mr. and Mrs. Charles C. Glover IH Mrs. Phillip L. Graham Dr. Sheila H. Gray Mr. and Mrs. Homer Gudelsky Mr. Henry Clay Hofheimer H Mr. Arthur A. Houghton, Jr. Miss EUsabeth Houghton Mr. and Mrs.. George S. Johnston
Patterson Mr. Charles Emory Phillips Mr. and Mrs. James H. Ripley Mrs. John Barry Ryan Mrs. John Farr Simmons Mr. T. D. Stewart Mrs. Catherine H. Sweeney Mr. and Mrs. Middleton Train Mr. and Mrs. Russell Train Mr. and Mrs. Robert D. van Roijen Mr. George C. Webster Mr. and Mrs. William S. Weedon Mr. and Mrs. J. R. Wiggins Mr. Edward Foss Wilson Mrs. Orme Wilson
Whitfield J. Bell, Jr. Librarian, American Philosophical Society, 105 South Fifth Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106. Born 1914. A.B. Dickinson College, Ph. D. University of Pennsylvania, 1947. Associated with Dickinson College 1937-1954; assistant and then associate editor of the Papers of Benjamin Franklin 1954- 1961. Has been with the American Philosophical Society as asso- ciate librarian (1961-1966) and librarian since 1966. Editor of Bibliography of the History of Medicine in the U.S. and Canada (1948-1953) and Mr. Franklin (with L. W. Labaree) (1956). Author of Needs and Opportunities for Research in the History of Early American Science (1955) ; John Morgan: Continental Doctor (1965).
Rose and the Ring, History of Henry Esmond, and Contributions to the "Morning Chronicle", and Wells' Desert Daisy and History of Mr. Polly.
Robert Engle, Special Assistant Mrs. Dorothy Rosenberg, Administrative Of- ficer Sidney R. Galler Charles Blitzer
William H. Anderson (Coleoptera), Mrs. Doris H. Blake (Coleoptera), Franklin S. Blanton (Diptera), Frank L. Campbell (Insect Physi- ology), K. C. Emerson (Mallophaga), Frank M. Hull (Diptera), William L. Jellison (Siphonaptera, Anoplura), Harold F. Loomis (Myriapoda), Carl F. W. Muesebeck (Hy- menoptera), Thomas E. Snyder (Isoptera), Robert Traub (Siphonaptera)
Frederick M. Bayer (Lower Invertebrates), Willard W. Becklund (Helminthology), J. Bruce Bredin (Biology), Isabel C. Canet (Crustacea), Maybelle H. Chitwood (Worms), Ailsa M. Clark (Marine Inverte- brates), Elisabeth Deichmann (Echinoderms), Roman Kenk (Worms), Anthony J. Pro- venzano, Jr. (Crustacea), Waldo L. Schmitt (Marine Invertebrates), Frank R. Schwengel (MoUusks), I. G. SoHN (Crustacea), Gilbert L. Voss (Mollusks), Mrs. Mildred S. Wilson (Copepod Crustacea)
Curator Mrs. Margaret B. Klapthor, Associate Curator Herbert R. Collins, Assistant Curator C. Malcolm Watkins, Supervisor and Curator Richard E. Ahlborn, Associate Curator Rodris C. Roth, Associate Curator John T. Fesperman, Jr., Supervisor and Asso- ciate Curator Cynthia A. Hoover, Associate Curator James M. Weaver, Concert Director Carl H. Scheele, Supervisor and Associate
Mrs. Arthur M. Greenvs'OOd (Cultural History), Elmer C. Herber (History), Ivor Noel Hume (Cultural History), Fred W. McKay (Numis- matics), Mrs. Anne W. Murray (Curator Emeritus, Costume), Mrs. Emery May Nor- web (Numismatics), R. Henry Norw^b (Numismatics), Mrs. Joan Pearson Watkins (Cultural History)
Leonard Baskin, William A. M. Burden, H. Page Cross, David E. Finley, Martin Friedman, Lloyd Goodrich, Walker Han- cock, Bartlett H. Hayes, Jr., August Heckscher, Thomas C. Howe, Mrs. J. Lee Johnson III, Samuel C. Johnson, Wilmarth S. Lewis, Henry P. McIlhenny, Ogden M. Pleissner, Edgar P. Richardson, Charles H. Sawyer, Mrs. Otto L. Spaeth, Andrew Wyeth
David Challinor, Director Kennedy B. Schmertz, Director, Foreign Cur- rency Program Anders Richter, Director Russell Shank, Director Mrs. Mary A. Huffer, Assistant Director Samuel T. Suratt, Archivist Nicholas J. Suszynski, Director Monroe E. Freeman, Director David F. Hersey, Deputy Director J. A. Collins, Director Frederic M. Philips, Director James R. Morris, Director TiMOTHOY P. Jecko, Deputy Director Mrs. Lisa M. Suter, Program Director Carl Fox, Director David B. Chase, Director
Teasdale, Exhibits Coordinators Robert M. Organ, Chief Mrs. Jacqueline S. Olin, Chemist Helena M. Weiss William P. Haynes, Assistant Registrar
From 13 through 16 May the eleven speakers, several hundred in- vited participants, and stafT members widely drawn from the Smith- sonian explored the extent to which aggression, cooperation, competition, and territoriality were common to man and other species. The sympo- sium yielded a rich perspective on the emergence of cultural factors whose operation attenuates the influence of our biological heritage, cor- recting an overemphasis attributed to innate behavior by a number of popular writers. The opening academic procession represented sym- bolically the fulfillment of the ideal of a scholarly community which the succeeding days of seminars, colloquia, formal papers, and social events realized in strikingly tangible manner. We are most grateful to the Russell Sage Foundation, The Grant Foundation, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, The Commonwealth Fund, and other contributing sponsors, and also to the inspiring chairmanship of Dr. Alex A. Kwapong, Vice Chancellor of the University of Ghana, who so ably presided. The pro- ceedings of the symposium will shortly appear from the Smithsonian Institution Press under the title Man and Beast: Comparative Social Behavior.
To the superlative collection of fine art he has donated to the United States for the benefit of the people, in 1969 Mr. Hirshhom's continued generosity resulted in the addition of more than five hundred new paintings and sculptures — an average of over ten new works each week received, cataloged, and stationed by Abram Lerner and his staff of three. Since November 1966, the date of Mr. Hirshhorn's gift, his generosity has led to the acquisition of outstanding new paintings and sculptures valued at over one million dollars each year, in addition to the one mil- lion dollars he has agreed to donate for future purchases upon the opening of the Hirshhom Museum.
The Computer History Project, supported by the American Federa- tion of Information Processing Societies, is now in its second year, under the direction of Dr. Uta Merzbach. This project comprehends the collection of documents and tape-recorded interviews with persons important in the development of the computer. Another major project in its second year is the New England Textile Mill survey. A report of the first summer's work, chiefly at Manchester, New Hampshire, was published this year.
The kinds of programs and services offered by the Cooper-Hewitt Museum bring to the Smithsonian new educational opportunities in the world of design. In today's ever-rapidly evolving concept of fashion and beauty, the need for a museum showcase, in which an endlessly rich variety of historical decorative arts material can be drawn upon, utilized, and enjoyed, provides a springboard which the Smithsonian can be influential in offering guidelines to more beautiful design in everyday life. The Museum's future move to upper Fifth Avenue will place us on New York's "Museum Row." Thus we hope the Cooper-Hewitt Museum will be able eventually to assume its proper place as a show- case of international reputation in the world of design. Particular thanks are owing to the newly formed Advisory Board under Mrs. Alice M.
The SEM which was developed at Cambridge University in Eng- land represents a major breakthrough in the field of microscopy. In only four years since it became commercially available, it has become a dominant research tool in such diverse fields in biology as pollen analysis, microfossil identification, and textile fiber-wear studies. In one area of basic research being done at the Smithsonian, Dr. R. H. Ben- son is using the sem for the study of the history of a minute fossil crustacean, the ostracode, which has lived on the floor of the deep ocean basins. His recent discovery of these microfossils in the rocks of the Alps suggests new dimensions to the ocean that once separated Europe from Africa during the time when dinosaurs dominated the landscape. The sem allows for much greater precision in the identi- fication and analysis of the living as well as fossil deep-sea ostracodes. Through their study it is hoped that massive movements of the ocean floor, which took place during the formation of mountain systems, can be discovered. This instrument will be available for use, when needed, by scientists in all departments of the Museum, many of whom have already made plans to use it in their research.
The Chesapeake Bay Center for Field Biology completed one level of its laboratory building and operated as a research arm of the Smith- sonian through a consortium with the Johns Hopkins University and the University of Maryland. Studies of the physical conditions and the populations of organisms in the estuary continued. Dr. Charles South- wick of the Johns Hopkins University found that the Rhode River estuary apparently was heavily enriched in September. Drs. William D. McElroy (on leave as Director of the National Science Foundation), Howard H. Seliger and William G. Fastie, also of Johns Hopkins Uni- versity, began measurements of the night and day patterns of bio- luminescence as an index of primary productivity. In the past year a further effort to raise funds for land acquisition for this most valuable field station has met with remarkable success. Nearly fifty percent of our goal of $800,000, to increase our holdings on the western shore of Chesapeake Bay to some 2000 acres, has been met. We are deeply grateful to the farsighted foundations; the Ford Foundation, The Re- search Corporation, the Scaife Foundation, the Old Dominion Foun- dation, the Fleischmann Foundation, and the Prospect Hill Foundation; all of whom have helped us in our project to create a national resource in ecological research, not only near Washington but also as part of a network of comparative study areas, an environmental consortium of universities and private and public institutions from Massachusetts to the Caribbean and Panama. Dr. George Watson completed a three- year study of the productivity of breeding ospreys at Poplar Island, a Chesapeake Bay Center property near the eastern shore of the Chesa- peake Bay. The osprey population is believed to be holding its own in the Bay despite its susceptibility to pesticides. Whistling swans mean- while are being studied by Dr. William J. L. Sladen of Johns Hopkins. More than half of the North American population of these birds winters m the bay. Studies of their local and long distance movements, feeding ecology, social behavior, and diseases are being achieved by observation of unmarked, conspicuously dyed, and radio-tagged birds.
In oceanography and limnology, direct observations of plants and animals living on the bottom of the shallow ocean and in the upper pelagic areas received considerable attention during the year. A wide spectrum of activities ranged from sponsorship of a special Edwin A. Link lecture on underwater man by Jon Lindberg and Dr. Joseph B. Maclnnis and the oflFering of diver-training courses to field investigations using scuba apparatus, submersible diving chambers, and small research submersibles. A multidisciplinary study of sharks and the coral reef environments was undertaken under the sponsorship of Edwin A. Link, Seward Johnson, William Mote, Ocean Systems Inc., and the Smith- sonian Institution in February and March of 1969. Five small vessels and a submersible diving chamber were assembled ofT British Honduras for the project known as shark 1969.
Sponsorship through working group 23 of the Scientific Committee on Ocean Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions resulted in a definitive study of plankton preservation being under- taken at the Smithsonian. Dr. Hugh Steedman of the University of Bath spent the months of July, October, November, March, and June planning and conducting experiments at the Smithsonian Oceano- graphic Sorting Center. Plankton preservation has sometimes been excellent and sometimes unsatisfactory using the traditional preserva- tives under differing field conditions. Histochemical and other work on carefully preserved collections will provide information on the causes of the variable results. Tests will be made to attempt to find better preservatives.
The Radiation Biology Laboratory of the Institution has participated actively in interdisciplinary ecology during the year. Under the Labora- tory, the third seminar series sponsored by the Smithsonian Institution and the Consortium of Universities of the Washington Metropolitan Area was introduced on 6 February by Dr. Sidney Caller, Assistant Secretary for Science. The Seminar in Environmental Biology was pre- sented for graduate credit and attracted large audiences of students and other interested people from the community. Thirteen lectures were presented by authorities in ecology and environmental biology from all over the United States, with topics ranging from arid-land to arctic ecology and from fresh-water productivity to aspects of controlled environments for space biology.
Of great interest in this connection is the work of Drs. Evans and Meggers of the Anthropology staff, with Dr. Melson of the Mineral Sciences division, in dating volcanic ash falls and determining special characteristics and age of volcanic activity at El Arenal, Costa Rica, and Quijos Valley, eastern Ecuador, with the archeological specimens from levels in the sites that had been covered by volcanic materials.
One of the aims of the National Zoological Park is to have a truly professional staff. The addition of a pathologist, Robert M. Sauer VMD, has been a step toward achieving this goal. We now have a trained zoologist at the head of the department of living vertebrates, another in charge of the bird collection, another heads the reptile division, and still another has been appointed as assistant to Dr. John F. Eisenberg in the scientific research department.
The initial implementation of the Smithsonian's role as executive agent for the Iran-United States science cooperation agreement occurred this year with the exchange of visits between Dr. Faryar, Underminister of Science and Education in Iran, and the Director of the Office of International Activities. Methods of disseminating research plans of scientists from each country interested in cooperative work have been established and efforts are now underway to locate funding sources.
The Smithsonian's expertise in assessing the environmental conse- quences of an isthmian sea-level canal was recognized by the appoint- ment of Dr. David Challinor of our Office of International Activities to the National Academy of Sciences special Committee on Ecological Research for the Interoceanic Canal.
This year marks the signing of an official agreement between Mrs. Merriweather Post, to whom the Institution owes so much, and the Smithsonian on the maintenance of her wonderful house, "Hillwood." The tours to Hillwood have had a continuous waiting list and are repeated as often as possible.
Turning to another aspect of our public affairs, I believe it is clear that the Smithsonian has during the past several years once again assumed the central status within the Washington community, and indeed the national community, that it occupied at least until the end of the 19th century. There is a broad body of evidence that this is the case. The Inaugural Ball for President Nixon in January, for example, echoed the earlier inaugural festivities for President Garfield at the A & I Building. Not only was the Museum of History and Technology the scene of one of this year's Inaugural Balls and other such celebra- tions marking the start of a new administration, but the Institution was also the scene of a number of farewell events for top officials in the outgoing administration, including several members of the Cabinet, and an unofficial farewell for President and Mrs. Johnson themselves.
This past year the educational programs, directed by Miss Zora Martin, covered a broad spectrum from guiding children and adults through exhibits and workshops for Community Reading Assistants of the Anacostia Model School Project to special science units led by a part-time teacher on loan from the District of Columbia Board of Education.
The Trustees met at the Museum of History and Technology on 6 March 1969, and created an executive committee consisting of Messrs. Humphrey, McPherson, Moynihan, Ripley, and Rogers. In addition, they approved the selection of Mr. Benjamin H. Read, for- merly Executive Secretary of the Department of State, as acting director, and accepted with thanks temporary quarters in the Smith- sonian Institution Building.
Concurrently, a contract has been let with Smithsonian Institution planning funds under which the Urban Design and Development Cor- poration, a new District of Columbia nonprofit corporation established by the American Institute of Architects and headed by Mr. Ralph G. Schwartz, will explore the feasibility of the recommended site for the Center on the future Market Square at 8th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue. The feasibility study is due on 1 September 1969.
To his ability, must be added Mr. Walker's prescience in the guidance of the Gallery's assistant director. Carter Brown, who now succeeds him. We salute Carter Brown as a brilliant successor to the indefatigable John Walker.
Perhaps the most historic moment of the year was the announcement last October that the Center's Theater would be named in honor of General and Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower. It was President Eisenhower, of course, who initiated the Center in 1958.
To the vital participation of the Regents this past year should be added the special news of the reappointment for a six-year term of Mr. John Nicholas Brown, citizen of Rhode Island, and the new appoint- ment of Mr. Thomas J. Watson Jr., citizen of Connecticut.
The annual meeting of the Board of Regents was held on 15 January 1969 at Hillwood, the home of Mrs. Marjorie Merriweather Post. Hill- wood has been deeded to the Smithsonian Institution and the transfer of the property and collections was formally accepted on this date by Secretary Ripley on behalf of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution.
The spring meeting of the Board of Regents was held on 21 May 1969 in the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries Building. This meeting was the last one to be attended by Earl Warren, retiring as Chief Justice of the United States and Chancellor of the Board of Regents. The Regents unanimously voted the following resolution, a copy of which was presented to Mr. Warren:
Foundation Estate of Mrs. Bliss Boeing Company Capital Cities Broadcasting Coca Cola Company Columbia Broadcasting System The Commonwealth Fund Corn Refiners Clarence A. deGiers Mrs. Robert Dunning Earth Science Imports Martin Ehrmann William Elkins Harvey Firestone Foundation for Voluntary Service Garrett Corporation Geigy Chemical Corporation General Dynamics General Electric Company Grant Foundation Grumman Aircraft Corporation Hughes Aircraft Corporation International Business Machines
Hoffmann LaRoche Foundation J. Lavalend Dr. George Lawrence M. Lebowitz Eli Lilly & Company Charles A. Lindbergh
A program in Cultural Studies is being established to serve the Insti- tution's scholarly enterprises in art and music history and the study of folk culture. Three PhDs have been earned in this area and one master's degree, while the equivalent of twenty-one credit hours of instruction has been offered by a total of twenty-three professional staff members. Dr. William Gerdts has been appointed a teaching associate and has conducted a graduate seminar on 19th-century American art in the National Collection of Fine Arts.
In Evolutionary and Systematic Biology, comprising the biological re- search departments of the National Museum of Natural History and sixty-five investigators, with twenty-four Iiolding university appoint- ments, the level of instruction offered has been equivalent to ninety- four credit hours. Six PhDs and two master's degrees have been earned. Dr. Richard Boardman has conducted a widely praised seminar on bryozoa, covering techniques of study as well as analyses of fine structure.
Miss Joyce Perry, participant in the 0£Bce of Academic Programs' 1969 Summer Institute in Museum Display Systems has a lively discussion with a group of inner-city sixth graders as part of an experiment In pupil reactions to museum objects. Data obtained will be used in the development of new teaching exhibits at the Smithsonian.
Almost any curator might be counted as a potential contributor to the study of these practical museum arts, as well as a dozen or so staff members for whom they are the primary professional commitment, as is true for conservators and reference system analysts. One PhD and one master's degree have been earned. Dr. Robert Organ, director of the Conservation Analytical Laboratory, has offered a course of lectures on chemistry. The equivalent of eighteen credit hours of instruction has been offered. Two staff members hold university appointments.
A central scheduling office has now been set up for the tours, allow- ing the instructor staff to devote more time to special class visits and the production of educational materials. Mrs. Joan Madden has joined the staff as Volunteer Representative and has greatly improved all as- p>ects of scheduling. The number of volunteer docents has more than doubled this year and the school tour total has increased by 235 per- cent. Far more important than numbers have been the efforts to trans- form the tours into freer learning experiences. Within the National- Collection of Fine Arts, for example, young children are encouraged to act out their responses to works of painting and sculpture. Under the guidance of Miss Susan Sollins the docents have worked up a remark- able improvisational tour.
An acute shortage of financial resources has blocked expansion of education programs for the past three years. Outside support from the National Science Foundation, the National EndowTiient on the Hu- manities, the Junior League of Washington, and the Home Library Foundation has helped to maintain the program level. Support for the Third International Symposium has been generously provided by the sponsors. The United States Congress has approved a centralization of educational funding within the Office of Academic Programs, which is expected to result in better communication of student numbers and program needs. More effective administrative procedures for scheduling school tours, for making appointments in higher education, and for certifying instruction to universities have been worked out and put into effect, made possible by an unusually dedicated staff. Wilton S. Dillon, a versatile social anthropologist who has seen distinguished service with the Phelps-Stokes Fund and the National Academy of Sciences, became Director of the Division of Seminars in January 1969. He is ably as- sisted by Mrs. Ruth Frazier. David Chase and Mrs. Grace Murphy direct the production of the Washington Academic Calendar and other special projects in urban and environmental affairs. Edward Davidson, a paleontologist who has done much of the work for his doctorate within the National Museum of Natural History, has joined the Division of Graduate Studies as a Program Associate, bringing to it an intimate knowledge of Smithsonian research.
Curator Richard B. Woodbury spent the summer of 1968 in New Mexico doing research on the changing patterns of land use and resource exploitation in the Zuni Valley, in collaboration with Mrs. Woodbury. He has completed three manuscripts, which have been accepted for publication. At the end of July 1969, he left the Smith- sonian to become chairman of the Department of Anthropology at the University of Massachusetts.
During the year, Van Beek, in collaboration with Mrs. Colyn Van Beek, completed nearly one half of the manuscript and about one third of the drawings of a volume entitled The Timna' Temple. This volume is to be published by the Johns Hopkins Press in the Arabian Publica- tion series of the American Foundation for the Study of Man.
David W. Von Endt has focused on a third problem: to determine the effect of external conditions on the rapidity of protein breakdown and nitrogen loss from human bone buried for periods ranging from several months to millennia. This project, supported by a Smithsonian Research Foundation grant, depends upon strict standardization of the Kjeldahl-Nesslerization method. Mrs. Barbara Fairfield has set up a standard curve for known amounts of nitrogen with proper statistical limits, has tested against this curve bone samples ranging from fresh bone to archeological samples, and has started burial simulation experi- ments using varying dry or wet heat levels to simulate decay over long periods of time. With a theoretical nitrogen-decay curve, nitrogen values from Byzantine, Roman, and Middle Bronze Age skeletons, as well as those from wet sites in prehistoric Turkey and the eastern United States, can be compared. Empirical observation on preliminary curves last fall suggests that nitrogen loss is retarded under arid conditions in Egypt and the southwestern United States.
Numerous college and high school students have worked on research projects with staff members. John Bear, senior at the University of Pennsylvania, has worked as a National Science Foundation summer fellow to complete his report on Iron Age skeletons from Afghanistan; D. Gentry Steele, a doctoral candidate at the University of Kansas, as an NSF summer research fellow advised by T. D. Stewart, has worked on the estimation of stature from incomplete long bones, using land- marks on identified bones of people of known stature in the Terry col- lection; Mrs. Catherine Wimsatt Mecklenberg (University of Wash- ington), research fellow under Lucile St. Hoyme in the Summer Re- search Assistant Program of the Smithsonian Research Foundation, has worked on demographic and population analysis of a Virginia Indian cemetery, interrelating cultural customs, disease, nutrition, and physical differentiation in a study used as a master's thesis.
Also worthy of mention is a collection of 521 African objects collected by Miss Genia de Galberg and one of 31 ethnological specimens of carved wood from New Guinea. Three other important ethnographic collections from Africa have been acquired : Walter Deshler of the Uni- versity of Maryland has assembled examples of Tuareg clothing for the Smithsonian Institution during a trip to the central Sahara; Miss Janet Stone has sold to the Museum a group of carvings and ornaments that she had acquired in Mali and Ivory Coast; and Miss Katherine Lavery has donated a portion of her collection of masks and sculptures from Upper Volta. A particularly important collection accessioned during the past year has been that made by Province M. and Eleanor R. Henry from the Paiwan and Atayal tribes of Taiwan. These are particularly valuable in that the objects are accompanied by unusually complete data. Also accompanied by complete records is a collection, mainly clothing, made in several highland communities in Ecuador and archeological collections from the Valdivia, Machalallila, Guangala, and Jambali cul- tures of coastal Ecuador. Tv^^o other large, documented collections are the Phebus collection of 2,912 items from California and the Hruschka collection, 984 items, from Prince Georges, Charles, and St. Marys counties, Maryland. The collections of named types of southwestern sherds has been increased by additions from Mesa Verde National Park, Gran Quivera National Monument, Jemez State Park, and from Casas Grandes, Chihuahua, Mexico. Eleven accessions of skeletal material have been added to the collections of Physical Anthropology during the year.
In the Conservation and Restoration Laboratory more than 1,200 specimens have been processed. Both Joseph Andrews and Mrs. Bethune Gibson have received certificates for completion of a course in the chemistry of conservation. At the end of the year, Mrs. Gibson was in London attending a course sponsored by the British Council on the con- servation of antiquities.
A new exhibit on Yoruba textiles and clothing has been conceived and written by Mary S. Thieme. Mrs. Thieme, who was granted a Museum internship for the year by the National Foundation for the Arts and Humanities, prepared her script under the general scientific supervision
Disasters. (Organized by Dr. T. D. Stewart at Smithsonian Institution by arrangement with the chief of Support Services, Department of the Army.) Washington, D.C. 11 December 1968.
Further expanded studies on the flora of Dominica have been made possible through the generosity of Mrs. William J. Morden. A Morden- Smithsonian expedition of three weeks' duration has surveyed the newly developed logging areas, with Mrs. Morden, D. H. Nicolson, R. DeFilipps, and M. E. Hale participating. It is hoped that a basic under- standing of vegetational change after logging can be gained that will lead to more intelligent land utilization. Gurator M. E, Hale has made the first extensive lichen collections. Surprisingly, two crustose families, the Graphidaceae and Thelotremataceae, comprise almost half of the lichen flora and show a high degree of speciation. Under the Bredin- Archbold-Smithsonian Biological Survey of Dominica, D. H. Nicolson and collaborator R. DeFilipps have made considerable progress on the final manuscript of the Dominican flora.
The talented stafT artists, Mrs. Elsie H. Froeschner and Andre Pizzini, have provided illustrations for a number of manuscripts, but the depart- ment still lacks adequate support in this area to match the research productivity of its specialists.
Several resident research associates have continued to work actively on systematic studies in their own areas of interest. Mrs. Doris H. Blake has nearly completed her worldwide revision of the chrysomelid genus Metachroma, and visited the Museum of Comparative Zoology twice during the year to study types. K. C. Emerson has made progress on taxonomic studies of the Anoplura of Nepal, Nigeria, Madagascar, Senegal, Pakistan, and Botswana and of the Mallophaga of Nepal, Vene- zuela, and Southeast Asia; many of the specimens have been collected by personnel of the Division of Mammals. C. F. W. Muesebeck has completed his large revision of the Nearctic species of the braconid genus Orgilus and has continued his valued services as translation editor of the Russian journal Entomological Review. Robert Traub has continued his work on the ecology of viral and rickettsial infections based on the
There have been some extremely valuable accessions from staff mem- bers as a result of past field work. Notable among these are 10,953 specimens from Argentina and Chile collected by Oliver S. Flint, Jr.; 10,788 from Arizona collected by Flint and A. S. Menke, usda (United States Department of Agriculture) ; 13,609 from the Marquesas Islands by J. F. Gates Clarke and Thelma Clarke; and 2,679 from Plummers Island, Maryland, by Paul J. Spangler. Flint's Chilean caddisflies have been put to immediate use in his continuing study of the Chilean fauna, and the Arizona specimens have provided valuable insights into the relationship between the Arizona and Mexican faunas. The Clarkes' accession have been particularly strong in Microlepidoptera and espe- cially important because of the material reared by Mrs. Clarke; he is currently engaged in working up the Marquesan fauna through study of types in the Leiden and British museums.
Several accessions have been most welcome inasmuch as they consti- tute material from areas previously represented very poorly, if at all, in the National Collection. A collection of Philippine mosquitoes from Francisco Baisas, consisting of 6,700 adults and 4,000 slides, has been of immediate use to seamp's research program on Southeast Asia mos- quitoes and has been particularly valuable because of the number of associated immature stages. Gerald I. Stage has donated 1,395 bees from all over the world, a gratifying addition because a large number of species have not been in the collection before. Mrs. Mary H. Ripley has collected 884 insects in Bhutan, most of them moths very meticulously prepared. Curtis W. Sabrosky, usda, and Krombein have obtained a small but useful lot of some 2,500 specimens in the Uzbek Soviet Social- ist Republic. The Reverend Rufus H. LeFevre has contributed 794 beetles, bugs, and moths collected during his missionary service in China. T. H. Davies has continued to favor the Department with New Zealand insects, this time with a lot of 668 specimens, mostly Lepidoptera.
The departmental preparator's unit — consisting of Ron Faycikj Marc Roth, and Gary Hevel — has continued its devoted service in the process- ing of back lots not accessioned in previous years and in handling in- coming lots. They have accessioned thirty-three lots consisting of nearly 93,000 specimens and have sorted and distributed them to the appro- priate divisions. In addition, they have mounted some 40,000 specimens that have not yet been accessioned. The major part of their effort, how- ever, during the year has been directed toward assistance in preparing collections for the move from the Lamont Street building to the Natural History Building. Roth and Faycik, working with Mrs. Vira Milbank, the divisional preparator, have transferred all of the Lepidoptera from about 500 nonstandard drawers into usnm drawers and cases in prep- aration for the move. After the collections were moved, they assisted in getting cases installed in the proper systematic arrangement.
Systematics of Indo-West Pacific stomatopod crustaceans have been continued by R. B. Manning, who has completed a review of Protosquilla and allied genera in the family Gonodactylidae and also a review of Harpiosquilla, family Squillidae. With the help of Mrs. Drina Byer, a computer-generated catalog of the type specimens of stomatopods in the National Collections has been prepared.
During the year a catalog of type specimens of echinoids in the Na- tional Museum of Natural History and the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard, prepared by museum specialist Maureen Downey, has been published. A similar catalog on ophiuroid type-specimens by Miss Downey is in press, and catalogs of asteroid and holothurian types are in preparation by Miss Downey and David Pawson, respectively.
The gem collection has been enriched by several excellent gems, in- cluding a 122.7-carat tanzanite, the largest known. Chamberlain endow- ment funds have greatly improved representation in the collection of the new gemstone tanzanite by the purchase of an 18.16-carat cat's-eye stone. Mrs. Kathryn Everhart has donated a beautiful white opal cabachon weighing 345 carats. Harry Winston, Inc., has given a magnifi- cent 858-carat emerald crystal from the Gachala mine in Columbia. It is the finest emerald crystal on public exhibit anywhere.
Foraminiferal species recovered from the estuarine Choptank River of Mary- land's Eastern Shore have been maintained successfully in a culture laboratory for more than two years. The program is directed by Dr. Martin A. Buzas, who is currently involved in studies of distributional pattern and other ecologi- cal factors concerned with low-salinity foraminifera. Laboratory technician Miss Brenda Williams is shown transferring specimens.
On Friday, 12 April 1968, at 8:30 p.m., a meteorite struck the roof f the home of Joseph W. Kowalski in Schenectady, New York, splinter- ig a portion of the eaves and rebounding onto the ground. Mr. Kowal- ki, who was watching television at the time, heard what he later iescribed as a sound "like a firecracker going off in the attic." Two ays later, on returning home from church, he observed the broken aves, noted the nature of the damage, searched the grounds adjacent D his home, and recovered from alongside his house a single chrondritic tone meteorite of mass 283.3 grams. Its exterior consists primarily of
In nominating him for a special Smithsonian award that he received in 1963, Dr. Fred L. Whipple wrote that "because of his effectiveness and wise counsel on administrative matters, scientists have been enabled to devote the fullest possible attention to scientific research. By his example, Tillinghast has instilled in all levels of his staff a challenge to initiative and achievement. He has developed an effective staff, made significant administrative and budgetary improvements, and given maximum sup- port to the Observatory's scientific achievement."
In Cali, Colombia, only one hour by air from Panama, a small sub- station has been established in cooperation with the Museo Depart- mental de Historia Natural, directed by Dr. Carlos Lehmann. Space is available for several scientists and students to use the structure as a base camp from which to study habitats ranging from the low, wet forests of Buenaventura to the nearby Andean heights.
Ira and Roberta Rubinoff have completed their analyses of isolating mechanisms in the marine fish Bathygobius. They have demonstrated that species from both coasts of the Isthmus will interbreed even though the species have been isolated for between two and five million years and are morphologically quite different. Mrs. Rubinoff has extended the investigation of isolating mechanisms to include invertebrate groups and has begun a study of social behavior in the sea urchin Diodema. The two scientists journeyed to Israel, where they visited many laboratories and met with a number of other scientists. A focus of common interest has been the migration of animals through the Suez and Panama canals.
The Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute can operate only w^ith the excellent cooperation of the Canal Zone government and the Panama Canal Company, the United States Army and Navy, and the government authorities of the Republic of Panama and the Republic of Colombia. Thanks are due especially to General Robert W. Porter, Jr., former Commander United States Armed Forces, Southern Com- mand; Executive Secretary of the Canal Zone Paul M. Runnestrand and his staff; Dr. Carlos Lehmann V., Director of the Museo de Historia Natural in Cali, Colombia; Colonel W. F. Bradbury, Post Commander, Fort Amador, Canal Zone; Commander James Cox, Commanding Officer, Naval Security Group; the customs and immigration officials of the Canal Zone; Captain Kenneth Roscoe, Senior Assistant Port Captain, Cristobal, Canal Zone; K. E. Biglane, Federal Water Pollution Control Administration; Dr. R. C. Pierson, Canal Zone Veterinary Hospital ; Colonel Clarence Little, Air Force Research Liaison ; Gotfred P. Nelson, Air Force Civil Engineering, Howard Air Force Base, Canal Zone ; and C. C. Soper of Eastman Kodak Company.
In August 1968, W. Shropshire, W. H. Klein, J. Brown, M. Mar- gulies, R. L. Weintraub, and H. Drumm attended the annual meeting of the American Society of Plant Physiologists in Amherst, Massachu- setts. Dr. Margulies presented a paper entitled "Synthesis of Ribulose Diphosphate Carboxylase by Chloroplasts in Vitro." Also in August, W. Shropshire, E. Gantt, J. L. Edwards, M. Margulies, W. H. Klein, H. Drumm, R. L. Weintraub, and D. L. Correll attended the Fifth Inter- national Congress on Photobiology at Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire, presenting a number of short papers. W. Shropshire chaired a symposium on phototropism. During that time, W. H. Klein
In February 1 969, Dr. Klein went to Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, to attend a study group briefing on the agricul- tural aspects of the proposed nuclear powered agro-industrial complex project designed to establish food production centers in warm arid areas adjacent to the sea and utilizing nuclear energy for providing desali- nated water.
In March 1969, E. Gantt gave a seminar entitled "Phycobiliprotein Localization in Red and Blue-Green Algae" and consulted with Dr. Thomas Brown at the Charles F. Kettering Research Laboratory in Yellow Springs, Ohio.
On 13 February 1969 a clinic for apes was set up in the small mammal house. Dr. Gray and pathologist Dr. Sauer, assisted by medical teams from George Washington University, who brought along a mobile x-ray unit, have conducted the schedule of procedures that include x-ray, blood tests, ppd injections, skin biopsies, and chromosomal analyses.
Archie, the huge male orang, put on a good show. When the syringe from the tranquilizer gun struck his shoulder, he felt it, removed it, tasted it, and smelled it. Then he lumbered over to the bars and handed it to Dr. Gray before succumbing to the anesthetic. Interested doctors and their assistants agree the most dramatic part of the smooth-running procedure occurred when the big gorilla Nikumba, weighing 450 pounds, thundered around in his cage trying to avoid the tranquilizing syringe. The winsome award goes to the baby orangutan.
Dr. Gray used a hand saw on the upper horn and a power saw on the lower, and the rough edges were filed smooth. The animal now presents a much neater and healthier appearance, and it is hoped that the horns will grow out straight after this surgery.
The portable x-ray machine, operated by Edward Eccard of George Wash- ington University's Medical Center, is in position for filming the inunobilized orangutan, Archie. Dr. Gray is pushing some of the thick shaggy hair out of the way. (Evening Star photographer Owen Duvall.)
The rare and lovely African black- footed cats had kittens; an orang- utan was born on 28 March 1969 and is being reared in the home of Mrs. Louise Gallagher, who has previously raised three gorillas and three chimpanzees for the Zoo. The Barbary ape colony has increased to the point where it equals, if not surpasses, the famous colony on
The Office of Pathology was born in August 1968 with the arrival at the National Zoological Park of a veterinary pathologist, Dr. Robert M. Sauer, from the staff of the University of Pennsylvania. During the next few months a laboratory was designed and equipped in a new but temporary building on a hill in the hardy-hoofed stock area. During February 1969 a histologic technician, Robert C. Childs, was appointed and the laboratory began to function. Upon completion of a research and hospital building, the entire operation will be moved permanently into this new facility.
George Washington University Medical School has furnished the Zoo with a resident veterinary pathologist, Dr. Bernard G. 2k)ok, for- merly with the Angell Memorial Animal Hospital in Boston. His func- tion is the investigation of conditions of potential biomedical impor- tance. Both of these nzp pathologists hold professorial positions on the George Washington University faculty and will participate in academic courses during the coming year. A seminar course in comparative pathol- ogy will be conducted at nzp during the fall of 1969.
Miss Marion McCrane, zoologist, resigned as head of the Informa- tion and Education Section on 1 December 1968, and Mrs. Sybil E. Hamlet became acting chief of the section.
The director. Dr. Reed, has continued his service as president of the Wild Animal Propagation Trust (wapt). This organization, chiefly through specialist committees, promotes the captive breeding of rare and endangered species. The Orangutan Committee has had consider- able success in arranging transfers, deposits, and sales between zoos to increase breeding potential. The National Zoo is nominal owner of three male orangutans made available to other zoos through wapt. The newly organized Giant Tortoise Committee is gathering information on the management and propagation of Galapagos tortoises, and plans are being made for a large new breeding compound in Hawaii. Other committees are concerned with such species as the golden marmoset and Arabian oryx. Future wapt plans include establishment of breeding herds on farms or ranches.
Dr. Reed and Mr. Perry represented wapt and aazpa in House and Senate hearings on endangered species legislation. Similar legislation
While in Brazil, Perry visited the site of an experimental project which the National Zoo is assisting in the state of Sao Paulo. A Bra- zilian scientist, Dr. Paulo Nogueira Neto, believes the African eland would adapt to the southern Brazilian savannas and become a valuable source of animal protein. The National Zoo is assisting Dr. Nogueira in obtaining elands. The first two were shipped to Sao Paulo in January 1969. The experimental site is a large fenced enclosure on Dr. Nogueira's property near Campinas.
The Friends have sponsored two lecture series, both being held at night in the elephant house. The first has consisted of six talks on "Our Wild Animal Resources." The series was opened by Secretary Ripley. Other speakers have been Emily Hahn, Dr. Theodore H. Reed, Dr.
Charles J. Stine of Johns Hopkins University, Dr. WiUiam J. L. Sladen, also of Johns Hopkins University, and Larry Collins of the National Zoological Park. These lectures are free and are offered to members and their guests. A subscription lecture series on "The Roots of Man- kind" has been given by Dr. John R. Napier, director of the Primate Biology Program in the Division of Mammals, National Museum of Natural History.
Mrs. Soedjatmoko and Galuh, wife and daughter of the Indonesian am- bassador, admire the 22-day-oId Manis orangutan. (Photograph by Donna Grosvenor) .
Overseas travel and research have played an important part in the activities of scientific research department personnel this year. On 10 June 1968 Dr. John F. Eisenberg, resident scientist, departed for a year's stay in Ceylon to undertake intensive ecological and ethological investi- gations of the Ceylonese elephant, including a study of the reproductive physiology of domestic Ceylonese elephants. Eisenberg also has con- tinued studies, with the other members of his research team in Ceylon, on the comparative ecology and behavior of Ceylonese primates.
On 9 February 1969 L. Collins was named zoologist in the depart- ment, and on 6 April 1969 Mrs. W. Holden was named administrative assistant to the resident scientist.
During the latter part of April 1969, Dr. P. S. Watts, director, Division of Animal Sciences, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Sciences, Ade- laide, South Australia, visited the department and discussed with Larry Collins several aspects of the investigations in progress pertaining to the breeding of dasyurid marsupials under captive conditions.
On 2 June 1969 Miss R. Aulisio, a senior biology major at St. Joseph's College, Emmitsburg, Maryland, was appointed as a visiting scientific research assistant by the Office of Academic Programs, Smithsonian Institution. Miss Aulisio has initiated an intensive investi- gation into the reproductive physiology and reproductive behavior of solenodons, Solenodon paradoxus, and pacaranas, Dinomys branickii.
During the past year. Dr. Eisenberg has held the following seminars : "Studies on the Ungulates in Ceylon's National Parks" at the Medical Research Institute, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 7 May 1969; and "Com- munication in Hemicentetes semis pinosus" at the University of New South Wales, Department of Zoology, Sydney, Australia, 29 May 1969. In addition, Eisenberg taught a class in ecology at the University of Ceylon, Peradeniya, for the month of November 1968.
Dr. Robert Higgins, formerly of the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, joined the Office as staff oceanographer in November 1968. A specialist in kinorhynchs and tardigrades, Dr. Higgins provided assistance in program development, particularly to the underseas activi- ties, before leaving for Tunisia in June 1969 to relieve Dr. Neil Hulings as the director of the Mediterranean Marine Sorting Center.
Dr. Aron spent most of August 1968 in Israel, dividing his time between field work in the Gulf of Eilat and the Red Sea and attendance at the International Limnological Congress in Jerusalem. The field program included midwater trawling on both sides of the Straits of Tiran, some benthic sampling in these same areas, and considerable shore collecting on the reefs. Included in the field party were Dr. Eugenie Clark of the University of Maryland, a group of technicians and gradu- ate students of The Hebrew University, and Mr. Menachem Ben-Yami of the Sea Fisheries Research Station in Haifa.
Dr. William Melson was chief scientist on a geophysical cruise on the pride of the United States oceanography fleet. Coast and Geodetic Sur- vey vessel Oceanographer, for two weeks in October 1968. Drs. Melson and Simkin from the Sorting Center and scientists from Princeton, the University of Washington, Oregon State University, and Scripps Institu- tion of Oceanography participated in the cruise, which was highly suc- cessful. Dr. Melson has contributed a new idea of local sea-floor spread- ing that involves bilaterally symmetrical features on either side of the Juan de Fuca Ridge. The Coast and Geodetic Survey has been very com- plimentary in its remarks on the cruise and of the immediate prepara- tion of a useful report. The survey has offered full cooperation to Dr. Melson's group in meeting future requirements for ship time.
During the period 15 February- 16 March 1969, a major underwater expedition took place off British Honduras under Office sponsorship. Using funds and direct support from Mr. Seward Johnson and direct support by Messrs. Edwin A. Link and William Mote, five ships and an underseas vehicle ads iv were assembled to engage in underwater inves- tigations of varied nature. Known as Shark 1969, the expedition grew from a proposal of Perry Gilbert from the Mote Marine Laboratory at Cape Haze, Florida. Dr. Gilbert, Mr. William Evans of the Naval Underseas Research and Development Laboratory, and others con- tributed a study of shark behavior using a "bite meter" developed by Evans. Walter Starck has studied coral reef fishes and has tried out a new scuba apparatus that he and John Kan wisher have invented.
Kanwisher accompanied the expedition. Dr. Dennis Devaney, post- doctorate specialist at nmnh has studied invertebrate behavior, Mr. Winston Miller of British Honduras has worked on lobsters, Dr. Robert Wilce of the University of Massachusetts has done research on algae, and Mr. Robert Wicklund of the Bureau of Sports Fisheries and Wild- life has experimented on the vertical transfer of fishes for pressure effects. Dr. Joseph Maclnnis of Ocean Systems, Inc., again has served as the expedition doctor and hzis done some photography. Two profes- sional photographers from Hollywood have participated in recording the activity.
Drs. Richard Benson and William Aron made a trip to India in January 1969, accompanied by Dr. Edward Brinton of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Consultations with Dr. N, K. Panikkar led to development of a proposal to use Indian rupees for a series of biological and geological cruises from Goa to the middle of the Arabian Sea. These cruises would develop information on the productivity of the shallow-to-deep-water transect at various seasons. Discussions with Dr. B. R. Seshachar, Head of the Indian International Biological Pro- gram, have led to approval by the University of Madras to host a sym- posium on sipunculids to be organized by Dr. Mary Rice in the Division of Worms. This will be the first international symposium on this group and should be an important step toward improved research output by the participating scientists. Discussions also have proceeded on the possi- bility of establishing a study of a coral reef, cooperatively with other United States and Indian scientists.
The Vetlesen Foundation has continued its support of Miss Julie Booth's activities on the Great Barrier Reef. Miss Booth has worked at Fairfax and Hook Islands, where she has made interesting observations on turtles, corals, birds, and other reef occupants. She is sending back specimens of the flora and fauna for the Smithsonsian collections.
A plan for an international decade of ocean exploration has been developed through the Marine Sciences Council to represent federal aspirations in ocean explorations during the next ten years. Dr. M. A. Buzas has served as the Office representative on the task group that assembled this plan and has contributed significantly to its development.
As Chairman of the United States Observer Delegation and United States National Correspondent, I. E. Wallen attended in October 1968 the Monaco meeting of the International Commission for the Scientific Exploration of the Mediterranean Sea (icsem). Substantial attention was paid to an approved International Cooperative Investigation of the Mediterranean. This study will be coordinated by a three-man group from the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of unesco (Dr. Federov), the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean of FAO (Dr. Charbonnier), and icsem (Dr. Cousteau). An international coordinator. Dr. J. Joseph, was named and four scientific committees have been chosen. An assistant coordinator for each committee will live in Monaco for the duration of the study, which began officially in October 1969 and will last for five years. There has been substantial interest on the part of Smithsonian oceanographers in participating in the study; the Mediterranean Marine Sorting Center will be the official specimen center.
Dr. Hugh Steedman of England spent the months of July, October, November 1968, March, and June 1969 planning and conducting experi- ments to be performed in international studies of plankton preservation. His travel to the Sorting Center was paid by the Scientific Committee on Ocean Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions, and his local expenses by the Smithsonian. Dr. Beers of the Scripps Insti- tution of Oceanography will collect plankton for the initial studies, which are expected to be duplicated in Tunisia. Plankton preservation sometimes has been excellent and sometimes very unsatisfactory with similar preservatives. Histochemical work on preserved materials will permit analyses of the reasons for such variation.
Femandina Island in the Galapagos provided the setting for a spec- tacular and rare volcanic event in July 1968. A Smithsonian expedition, mounted under the leadership of Dr. Thomas Simkin of the Smithsonian Oceanographic Sorting Center, spent a month in the Galapagos study- ing the volcano itself and the geological and biological effects on the crater lake and the surrounding ocean. This eruption was most unusual in that it involved the collapse" of a significant portion of the caldera, part of which sank more than 300 meters. During his return trip. Dr. Simkin made observations, as a member of a Presidential mission, on the volcanic eruption in Costa Rica.
Dr. Carl George, formerly of the American University, Beirut, Leb- anon, has had support from excess currencies and this Office for a tour of the Nile River in Egypt, from Aswan to Alexandria, to gather data concerning the changes in the Mediterranean fisheries owing to construction of the Aswan Dam. The data were gathered in anticipation of a meeting at Airlie House in December 1968. Secretary Ripley spoke then of the environmental consequences of a possible interoceanic sea- level canal and gave examples from the Suez Canal studies. Environ- mental prediction is being considered by current planners for engineering modification of the environment. As an outcome of this trip, a proposal by Dr. George has been accepted to investigate the effects of the Aswan on some of the lower Egyptian lakes.
Interest in Mediterranean geology led Dr. Daniel Stanley to par- ticipate in a NATO-sponsored cruise of Paolina I, an Italian vessel in the western Mediterranean in January 1969. Dr. Jack Pierce used Coast Guard vessel Kane for a sediment cruise off North Carolina.
Coast Guard vessel Rockaway was used by Dr. Dan Stanley in three two-week cruises for studies of the nature and origin of Wilmington Canyon. These large ships were provided by the Coast Guard as a very substantial contribution to Smithsonian Oceanography.
As a part of the effort to gain support for Smithsonian systematics, a series of field guides has been sponsored for sale or distribution to the general public and to the mission agencies. Dr. George Watson has been the most productive along this line with his Preliminary Field Guide to the Birds of the Indian Ocean, Seabirds of the Tropical Atlan- tic Ocean, and Seabirds of the Tropical Pacific Ocean. He is preparing a similar book on Antarctic birds. Dr. Robert Gibbs joined Dr. Bruce Collette of the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries in producing Preliminary Field Guide to the Mackerel- and Tuna-like Fishes of the Indian Ocean (Scombridae). Recently Dr. Horton Hobbs authored Keys to Water Quality Indicative Organisms and Peter Glynn (stri) produced with Robert Menzies The Common Marine I so pod Crustacea of Puerto Rico: A Handbook for Marine Biologists. Support for these efforts has come from the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, the National Science Foun- dation, this Office, and the National Museum of Natural History.
After discussions with the National Institutes of Health, a simple agreement resulted in its purchase of nearly $5,000 worth of supplies for the Sorting Center. In exchange for the supplies sosc has provided forty species of marine organisms in quantities of one kilogram or more. Shortly after this agreement was reached. Dr. H. A. Fehlmann and Mr. Ernani Menez of the sosc staff and Mr. Victor Haley, an sosc techni- cian, collected in Antarctica on board the National Science Foundation vessel Hero, with a Bureau of Commercial Fisheries team based in the state of Washington. Dr. Fehlmann made cold-water collections, and then stopped in Panama for warm- water collections. Common species are sought for unusual chemicals.
The first phase of the data-processing system records specimens identi- fied only to taxonomic levels higher than species. These higher categories are suitable for identification of the groups processed and distributed by sosc and for similarly processed collections at other institutions. A second phase of the system, begun this year, will incorp>orate records on specimens after they are studied and identified to species level by special- ists. Programming for this inventory is under a special contract with Mr. Fred Krazinsky, who will continue to assist sosc with development of the system. When programming for the species inventory is completed, both inventories can be collated or queried, or both, to retrieve all available information on any sample or sets of samples regardless of the level to which the specimens have been classified. Initial testing of the species inventory is complete and related programming is under way.
The major geological collection received this year is 2,500 pounds of rocks taken by Eltanin from 224 localities on her first thirty-two cruises. This collection reached sosc in January 1969. A collection of thirty- three sediment cores from Florida was received in February 1969 from the Coastal Engineering Research Center (gerc) of the Army Engineers. These cores will be followed by additional collections from the Atlantic coast as the cerc research program proceeds. A small collection of rocks taken by usns Kane has been submitted for identi- fication by Dr. Martin Weiss of the Naval Oceanographic Office.
Formerly at the Smithsonian as a graduate student at George Wash- ington University working with Dr. Thomas Bowman of the National Museum of Natural History, Dr. John McCain joined the permanent staff of the Sorting Center 1 March 1969. As his first assignment. Dr. McCain continued to make collections on the National Science Founda- tion Antarctic vessel Hero during March 1969. Formerly on the staff of the Oregon State University Marine Laboratory at Newport, he will be assistant supervisor for Benthic Invertebrates.
A cooperative program between Mohammed V University, Rabat, the Institute of Fisheries, Casablanca, and mmsc to survey the marine fauna and flora of Moroccan waters on both sides of the Straits of Gibraltar was begun in June 1969. Dr. Stim is field project leader for this program, and all of the male scientific staff of mmsc will participate in the two-month survey.
THE SMITHSONIAN OFFICE OF ECOLOGY was established in 1965 to assist in expanding the research opportunities of scientists in the National Museum of Natural History, the Smithsonian Tropical Re- search Institute, the Radiation Biology Laboratory, and the Chesapeake Bay Center for Field Biology, and to aid in the coordination of eco- logical activities with other United States agencies. During this year, the program has continued to be directed toward major problem areas in ecosystem research. Studies of endangered species, of the biology of natural areas, of principles of vegetation change, and of behavior in populations of wild animals have been emphasized in worldwide investi- gations. The expanding need for participants in ecological research has led to changes in the assignments of Drs. Helmut K. Buechner and Lee M. Talbot. Dr. Buechner, who has served as head of the Office since its inception, has been appointed a senior scientist in the Office. He will pursue research on the ecology of ungulates with emphasis on African species. Dr. Talbot, who has served as deputy head of the Office and coordinator of International Affairs since May 1968, will conduct re- search as resident ecologist in the Office. He will continue his interest in Asian and African game preser\^es and assist Secretary Ripley in liaison with the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources and numerous other international conservation activities.
During the year Dr. Buechner has continued to serve as an observer on the Federal Council for Science and Technology Committee on Environmental Quality, which has been in existence since 1967. This committee has facilitated communications between federal agencies on activities concerned with the environment, concentrating primarily on problems of pollution. The commitee is expected to continue to function and will complement the President's newly created Environ- mental Quality Council.
In considering the conservation of nature and natural resources, the Office focuses the attention and capabilities of the Smithsonian on environmental problems such as the prediction of the consequences of environmental modifications, pollution, and the establishment of parks and reserves. A close working relationship has been maintained and strengthened with the various organizations concerned with interna- tional conservation, including the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (iucn) , the International Council for Bird preservation, the Fauna Preservation Society, the Conservation Foundation, the World Wildlife Fund, the International Biological Pro- gram (iBp), and the Pacific Science Association. Scientists of the Smith- sonian have participated actively in the works of the iucn Commissions, including the International Commissions on Ecology, National Parks, Survival Services, and Education. Dr. Talbot assists the conservation work of the ibp, collaborating with E. M. Nicholson, convener of the Terrestrial Conservation Section, in the establishment of a worldwide network of research preserves and in developing international coopera- tion toward the scientific conservation of natural resources.
Assistance has been given to the Office of Science and Technology in American preparations for the unesco International Conference on the Scientific Basis for Rational Use and Conser\'ation of the Resources of the Biosphere. In Paris, in September 1968, Dr. Talbot represented the Smithsonian in the United States delegation to the conference.
Arrangements were made with the Oliver Foundation, the Smith- sonian Excess Currency Program, unesco, and the iucn for Mr.
Wayne A. Mills to spend six months in Asia, starting in June 1969, serving as the iucn Regional Representative and coordinating Smith- sonian support of the 11th Technical Meeting and the 10th General Assembly of the iucn, which was held in New Delhi 24 November-1 De- cember 1969. Mr. Mills collected and distributed research data pertinent to the discussions and field studies.
Dr. Buechner completed preparations for a project that was launched in the summer of 1969 to explore the feasibility of using satellites to track free-ranging animals and obtain physiological data. Elk were instrumented in the Jackson Hole area of Wyoming and will be followed for about one year, using the Nimbus B-2 satellite system. Frequent ground observations will verify locations and transmit observations of behavior. The experiments will provide a basis for testing the satellite tracking technique while at the same time producing useful informa- tion on the behavior of elk in relation to weather, seasonal changes, migration stimuli, herd composition, habitat requirements, and range condition.
Dr. F. S. L. Williamson, director of the Chesapeake Bay Center for Field Biology, visited Poland in November 1968 to examine ibp field sites and stations where research parallel to that planned for the Bay Center is being conducted and to explore the possibilities of collabora- tion. On his return he stopped over in Great Britain to tour Oxford University's Wytham Woods Station with Charles Elton. In July and August of 1968, Mr. Elton visited Belem, Brazil, as a Smithsonian Fellow to study certain aspects of the population density and species diversity of the rain-forest fauna. Results of the study are being compared with data from Wytham Woods, which he has studied intensively for more than twenty years.
Dr. Williamson also has made two field trips to Alaska in connection with studies of the species composition, population density, ecological and geographic distribution, breeding biology, and feeding ecology of the birds of Amchitka Island. The Office has provided assistance to Dr. Stanwyn Shetler, Department of Botany, for a survey trip to Alaska in connection with a planned study of pollination systems in the Arctic.
Through a contract with the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, support has been given to a series of studies on various aspects of ecology. Twelve scientists have participated in the program, seven of whom have conducted their research at the Smithsonian's Barro Colorado Island in Panama. Dr. Juan Delius of the University of California at San Diego has visited Barro Colorado Island to record observations on the behavior of various neotropical primates.
Dr. Thomas Eisner of Cornell University has investigated a variety of insects and other invertebrates known to produce defensive secre-
Dr. John D. McCrone of the University of Florida has worked with the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute's Dr. Michael Robinson on various aspects of the pre-capturing behavior of the spiders Argiope argentata and Nephila claripes. A brief survey tour to examine the opportunities for research on the species diversity of amphibians in Panama has been made by Dr. Eric R. Pianka of Princeton University. Dr. Herbert Rosenberg of Cornell University has conducted a prelim- inary study on certain aspects of the predator-prey relationships of various arthropods.
Support has been given for Dr. James Peters of the Reptile Depart- ment to visit several of the larger collections of reptiles in Latin America and examine their holotypes. Mr. Timothy C. Williams of
Rockefeller University has been assisted in his study of the nocturnal behavior of bats. Support has been provided for Dr. Ernest J. Hugghins of South Dakota State University to study the zoogeographical rela- tionships of South American fishes as indicated by their parasites. Dr. Ke Chung Kim of Pennsylvania State University has visited the Pribilof Islands to conduct research on the ectoparasites of the northern fur seal.
In cooperation with ibp, support has been provided for Dr. Donald W. Rennie of the State University of New York at Buffalo to conduct research on the physical fitness, work capacity, and respiratory functions of Eskimos in Wainwright, Alaska. The study has been coordinated with a multidisciplinary investigation of health, child growth, genetics, and ecology of Eskimos under the direction of Drs. Frederick Milan and William S. Laughlin of the Department of Anthropology, University of Wisconsin. With the support of the Office, Mr. Nicholas Smythe, a stu- dent of the National Zoological Park's Dr. John Eisenberg, has con- ducted field research on the behavior and ecology of the caviomorph rodent Dolichotis patagonum in Argentina. Assistance has been provided for Dr. Cleofe E. Calderon to collaborate with Dr. Thomas S. Soder- strom of the Botany Department in an interdisciplinary study of the insect pollination of rain-forest grasses.
Smithsonian studies of the ecology and ethology of elephants in Ceylon have continued with Dr. Fred Kurt concentrating in Ruhunu (Yala) National Park and Mr. George McKay surveying the adjacent areas of Lahugala and Gal Oya National Park. In Ruhunu, comparative studies
In late June of 1968 Dr. John F. Eisenberg and family began an eleven-month residence in Ceylon. His primary research effort has been directed toward the third and last national park that has not been sur- veyed by the team. This park, named Wilpattu, has presented some difficulty. Since it is densely forested, direct observation is somewhat impeded. Nevertheless, the study of the area has provided valuable com- parative data concerning the land-use patterns of the elephant. Refine- ment of field-censusing techniques has been an early objective. The final census information on the numbers of each age and sex class will be combined with estimates of abundance in different habitats to de- lineate such population parameters as the reproductive state of the population, the density of habitat usage, and the degree of competition with other species.
Two supplementary studies were initiated in August 1968. The first involved Mr. A. P. W. Nettasinge in a survey of the elephant popula- tion in the Maheveli Ganga basin northeast of Polonnaruwa. The sec- ond study required the participation of Drs. J. B. Jayasinghe and Jainu- deen of the faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Ceylon, Pera- deniya. Together with Dr. Eisenberg, they have attempted to breed domestic elephants in order to determine such basic physiological data as periodicity of oestrus, duration of oestrus, physiological manifestations of oestrus, and sexual behavior patterns of the male and female. The experiment has never been scientifically conducted in Ceylon. Two fe- male elephants were successfully bred with one male during December 1968, January and February 1969, and a preliminary review of the data obtained seems to indicate that the basic structure of the elephant re- productive cycle has been worked out for the first time. Further tests are urgently needed as well as laboratory tests on the hormonal content of the blood in pregnant, nonpregnant, and oestrus females.
In collaboration with the team of zoologists, Dr. Dieter Mueller- Dombois, a botanist and plant ecologist, also supported by a Smithsonian PL 480 grant, has led his team in the continuation of its studies. A
A major environmental influence on the vegetation of the park is the large animals — elephant, buffalo, axis deer, sambar deer, and wild boar. Conversely, the vegetation types are expected to exert an influence on the daily and seasonal distribution of the animals. To explore these rela- tionships, a new method to assess the animal activity patterns is being developed and tested. Dr. Mueller-Dombois, in addition to help with the identification of plants used as food by the animals, is studying the rate and pattern of grass recovery in areas grazed by telephants in an attempt to gauge the carrying capacity of the nonwoody vegetation.
In addition to these studies, a preliminary investigation of the relation- ships between man and domestic elephants has been continued by Dr. Eisenberg and Dr. Suzanne Ripley. The purpose of this project has been to lay the groundwork for intensive study of the interspecific social adaptation of man and tame elephants in Ceylon. Major orientations of the investigation are : ( 1 ) to relate knowledge about the ecology and be- havior of wild elephants to the taming transitions and human society, and (2) to relate the above to the sociocultural roles of elephants at present and in historical perspective in Ceylon within the general con- text of South Asia. Present emphasis is on the collation of the results of interviews with owners of tame elephants and with mahouts and the initiation of a bibliographic search in connection with the historical dimension of the study.
Under the direction of Eisenberg and Ripley, studies on the ecology and behavior of the Ceylonese primates has continued. The ultimate objective of this program is to determine the modes of exploitation of the environment by the different species and races of primates by relat- ing data on ecology, sociology, energy budget, and form and function to relevant variations in the environment. In order to set up comparisons based on habitat differences, some basic knowledge of climatic and vegetational variations must be assumed, and in this connection, Dr. Mueller-Dombois and his associates have provided valuable assistance. With the results of their work on climate, vegetation, and soils in Ruhunu National Park, it has been possible to launch comparative, intraspecific studies now in progress on Perslytis entellus (common langur) . Special problems have been raised since the early 1960s regard- ing the population dynamics of this species in India, especially with reference to habitat richness, population density, group size and com- position, and the role of aggression in spacing. It is anticipated that data from the Smithsonian project will prove to be helpful.
With Dr. Talbot serving as project coordinator, field activity during the year has been conducted by Paul W. Joslin on the social behavior of the Asiatic lion {Panthera leo persica) , a species whose range once extended through the Middle East and much of the Indian sub- continent but today is found only in the Gir. Fewer than 175 of the ani- mals are alive today, and the influence of cattle on the area is rapidly decreasing the lion's habitat. K. T. B. Hodd, a botanist, is conducting vegetation studies designed to discover the causes of vegetation deteriora- tion. Grazing intensity is being monitored and studied through the use of enclosures and experimental control plots. These studies will produce broad conclusions applicable to the management and conservation of the area.
States to discuss the possibilities for cooperative ibp research projects in his country. As a result of this visit a cooperative ecological research program has been developed with Dr. Frank B. Golley, executive direc- tor of the Institute of Ecology, University of Georgia. The project in- volves study of the productivity and mineral cycling of deciduous forest, grassland, and cropland in the Chakia District of India. In March 1969 on behalf of the Smithsonian, Dr. Golley visited the research area in India for further planning for the project.
Following completion of his work on the Smithsonian Elephant Proj- ect in Ceylon, Dr. Fred Kurt made a one-month research visit to India to obtain comparative data on the elephants of Mysore Province.
During the year. Dr. Talbot has made two visits to the area to complete research plans with representatives of the Tunisian government, fao, UNESCO^ the French National Center for Scientific Research, and the United Nations Development Fund (undf) . Approval of the plan has been given by the Tunisian authorities and a request made to the undf. Research has been started by French scientists, and, in April 1969, Dr. Thomas Soderstrom made a survey trip, resulting in the development of a plan for research on grasses.
On behalf of the Office, Dr. Walter Leuthold has conducted a study of the most suitable areas in East Africa for ecological and behavioral studies of individual species of ungulates, particularly those on which little or no ecological research has been conducted to date. Dr. Leuthold's final report was submitted in August 1968. Current infor- mation is given on the game areas of Kenya, on research carried out in the past, and on that which is at present under way. Summaries are in- cluded of the programs of existing research institutions.
Arrangements have been made for Dr. Wallace Ernst, associate curator in the Department of Botany, and Dr. Robert Omduff of the University of California in Berkeley to visit Morocco to investigate the possibilities for collaborative ecological research.
In November 1968 Dr. Talbot visited Pakistan to explore possibilities for collaborative research and to identify personnel and procedures. A research project has been developed on the ecology of the wild boar {Sus scrofa cristatus) of West Pakistan, a species of ecological and economic interest because of the damage it does to agricultural crops. Dr. M. I. R. Khan, director of the Pakistan Forest Research Institute, and Professor R. D. Tabor of the University of Washington will con- duct the research.
One of the world's largest river basin programs is being studied for development in the four riparian countries of the lower Mekong Basin : Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam. Nearly thirty countries and a variety of international organizations are cooperating on a program that eventually will involve a series of main river dams, plus more than twenty tributary dams, with vast irrigation projects and power plants. To date virtually all the feasibility studies and preconstruction research has involved engineering and economics, to the exclusion of considerations of sociological and ecological consequences. Under arrangements made with the Southeast Asia Development Advisory Group (seadag), Smithsonian ecologists Raymond Fosberg, David Challinor, and Lee Talbot, assisted by Dr. Richard van Cleve of the University of Wash- ington, made an ecological survey of selected areas of the Mekong during the summer of 1969 to identify and plan the longer-term research needed to predict the consequences of the dam construction and irriga- tion projects. The survey will identify and develop a description of needed research projects.
Under the direction of Dr. Francis S. L. Williamson, the Chesapeake Bay Center for Field Biology (cbcfb) has accelerated its program and progress in close cooperation with the Johns Hopkins University and the University of Maryland. Some major administrative accomplishments have been the restructuring of the Articles of Operation and their ratifi- cation by the Scientific Advisory Committee. This document, together with newly developed and appropriate forms for the use of facilities, a fee schedule, and a format for research proposals, should aid in the proper functioning of the Center. The Scientific Advisory Committee has been enlarged by the addition of members from Duke, North Carolina State, and Cornell universities. These members increase the scientific scope of this important body, which is central to scientific pro- gramming at the Center.
One of the objectives of the Center is to plan for the protection, improvement, and establishment of sound practices in soil conservation and land management of the Center and its watershed. In accordance with this objective the Center has entered into a conservation agree- ment with the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District, and a lease has been developed for the farming of its agricultural lands. To further this objective. Dr. Williamson has become a member of the Anne Arundel County Committee for the Maryland Environmental Trust, and the Mayo Civic Association. Other land-management plans are in active progress.
Dr. Charles H. South wick of Johns Hopkins University has con- tinued his monthly measurements of temperature, salinity, light pene- tration, pH, conductivity, dissolved oxygen, and nutrients such as ammonia-, nitrate-, and nitrite-nitrogen, polyphosphates, orthophos- phates, and total phosphates. The results of these measurements have revealed that while the Rhode River has been generally in a healthy condition and had normal nutrient levels in July and August 1968, an increase in ammonia nitrogen and phosphates occurred in September 1968. When compared with September 1968 samples taken in the Back River estuary, one mile below the outfall of effluents from the Baltimore sewage treatment plant, ammonia nitrogen level in the Rhode River was higher: 1.3 ppm as opposed to 0.8 ppm. The fact that 2 ppm of this nutrient may indicate a detrimental water quality condition points to the need for studies of the land-water interface and of the movements of materials of diverse sorts into the estuary. The principal contrasting types of land-use — rural versus heavily urbanized — that characterize the opposite shores of the estuary, encourage this important comparison.
Monitoring of fish populations has continued under the direction of Dr. South wick. Sampling at three Rhode River localities (Fox, Sellman, and Muddy Greeks) has been done with nylon graded-mesh gill nets. Netting in August and September 1968 revealed dense populations of Alosa sapidissima, Pomatomous saltatrix, Leiostomus zanthurus, and Fundulus species. The results of sampling at the Genter are being com- pared with those from other estuaries with adjacent land areas diflfer- ently utilized and whose characteristics of water quality and plankton biota may differ. These comparative areas include the highly eutrophic Back River. Three studies of estuarine birds, the Osprey, the Whistling Swan, and waterfowl populations are also imder investigation.
Dr. George E. Watson and Mr. Jan Reese of the Smithsonian Insti- tution have completed a three-year study of the productivity of breeding Ospreys (Pandion haliaetus) at Poplar Island, that portion of the Center in Talbot County, Maryland, on the eastern shore of the Chesapeake Bay. This cosmopolitan species is dwindling in numbers, and, in North America, has almost disappeared from some northern areas. Unsuccess- ful reproduction and the encroachment by man upon the nesting areas are factors influencing this decline. The Ospreys on Poplar Island, a part of one of the largest colonies along the east coast, have averaged thirty nests per year for three years. The birds prefer standing dead trees for nest sites, but their availability has decreased due to loss by shore erosion, and the birds have been forced to nest on lower sites. Although other Osprey populations have reproductive rates too low for normal annual recruitment, this colony is now producing about one fledgling per active nest. This number is about three times the rate in Connecticut, where few eggs now hatch. Pesticides, particularly chlori- nated hydrocarbons such as dot, are strongly indicated as the cause of the general decline in breeding success; for example, Connecticut birds have five to ten times more pesticide residues in their body tissues than the Maryland birds. Eggs taken from Connecticut nests have pro- duced few young when placed in Mar)'land nests although a reverse switching has produced normal numbers of young in Connecticut.
Studies of the Whistling Swan {Olor columhianus) at the Center, on the eastern shore of Chesapeake Bay, and on their northern breeding grounds were begun in 1967 by Dr. William J. L. Sladen of Johns Hopkins University and are continuing as a major project. Over half of the North American population of these birds, in excess of 50,000, winter in the bay, and annual counts indicate that their numbers are increasing. The objectives of the study, local and long-distance movements, feeding ecology, social behavior, and diseases are being achieved by observations of both unmarked and conspicuously dyed birds, tracking of birds carry- ing small transmitters, and autopsies of diseased birds (see below) . The results of this study include evidence of fidelity to precise wintering areas between years, the exact nature of local, premigratory movements, and — through observations of color-marked birds in Pennsylvania, New York, Wisconsin, North Dakota, Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and on the breeding grounds in the Northwest Territories — the timing, course, and altitude of long-distance flights. Thus, by utilizing the tech- niques of conspicuous dyeing and biotelemetry, this swan is proving to be an ideal model for migratory studies of waterfowl. These studies shed much light on the hazards posed by these birds to commercial aircraft and on their important role in the ecology of the local estuarine ecosystem.
The cooperation of neighbors in permitting the Center to purchase rights to shooting blinds along the shoreline of their respective properties again has provided a twelve-mile sanctuary for wintering waterfowl. Mr. John Moore of the Baltimore Zoological Society has conducted a band- ing program on Fox Point and other localities, thus providing informa- tion on composition of the wintering duck population: at Fox Point approximately 300 Lesser Scaup [Aythya affinis) , 16 Ruddy Ducks {Oxyura jamaicensis) , and 18 Canvasbacks [Aythya valisineria) . Four pairs of Ring-necked Ducks {Aytha collaris) have been collected for the Baltimore Zoological Society collection. The Ruddy Duck is especially abundant as is the Mallard [Anas platyrhynchos) , but the number of Canvasbacks is down from those seen in previous years.
New additions to the vascular flora of the Center have been made by Mr. Daniel Higman, staff botanist, and collections have been begun on the Star Company land (south of Java Farm) . This interesting property includes an extensive freshwater marsh containing a plant community unlike any other at the Center. Collections from this marsh are being studied. Ten additional vascular plants have been identified, bringing the total for the Center to 568 species.
The Center, with its mosaic of vegetation types, is ideally suited for the studies of avian populations being conducted by Dr. Williamson. The goals are the gathering of data on species composition, density, breeding biology, the spatial and temporal structuring of populations, and their interrelationships. The initial study area of seventy-five acres, located in mature deciduous woodland, contains four rows of eleven mist nets each, spaced at 50-meter intervals. The rows are 100 meters apart. The marking and releasing of over 500 breeding birds, combined with censuses of singing males, has provided the basic data. Forty-two species of birds have been recorded in the climax forest during the reproductive season, and the numbers and distribution of breeding pairs have been recorded. In addition to their intrinsic ecological interest, these results provide baseline data of considerable value for long-term study of the effects of varying patterns of land use in adjacent areas — including the use of diverse chemicals — on the large avian populations that comprise an important trophic level in the forest ecosystem, essentially that of anthropod predators.
Studies of the foraging ecology of the most abundant and important insectivorous bird at the Center, the Red-eyed Vireo ( Vireo olivaceous) , have been completed by Mrs. Penny Williamson of Johns Hopkins Uni- versity. Observations of this species at the Patuxent Wildlife Research
The studies of Dr. Southwick on population dynamics of the White- footed Mouse {Peromyscus leucopus) , on a 17-acre island in the estuary, are now in the third year. Population size and age composition of thisi population have proven unstable. The numbers declined markedly im 1967 but rose sharply in 1968. This long-term study of population fluctu- ations of a small rodent, confined in areal space, is now complicated by' the recent discovery on the island of the House Mouse {Mus musculus) and the Rice Rat {Oryzomys palustris) .
A long-term study of poxvirus disease in the Starling {Sturnus vul- garis) at the Center and in nearby Pennsylvania has been completed, at least in its broad aspects, by Dr. Williamson. In the field, data, gathered on the prevalence of the disease during three consecutive' epizootics have revealed that greater than 50 percent of the population (regardless of sex or age) may be infected at one time, coincident with the gathering of the birds into the communal roosts of winter. These roosts are formed during that period of the year when environmental conditions (snow, low temperature) are most unfavorable for the birds. It is believed that transmission occurs via direct contact between indi- viduals and that the virus enters through injured skin surfaces or intact mucosa. Indirect evidence of mortality under natural conditions has been obtained. In birds experimentally inoculated intradermally there
A study of the incidence of blood parasites in birds of the deciduous forest by Dr. Paul E. M. Fine, University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary Medicine, has resulted in valuable baseline data for more detailed investigations. Blood smears have been taken from 353 birds (42 species), and 182 infections in 129 birds (36.5 percent) have been disclosed. Eighteen infections are confirmed as Plasmodium, 64 are either Haemaproteus or Plasmodium, 31 are Haemaproteus, 15 were Leucocytozoon, 35 are Trypanosoma, and 19 are Lankesterella. Forty- five of 60 Red-eyed Vireos (75 percent) have been infected with one or more species of parasites, and multiple infections are common. Similarly, 29 of 39 Cardinals {Richmondena cardinalis) , 74 percent, have been infected. Subinoculation of 19 Canaries with blood from Red-eyed Vireos have revealed that most of the questionable Plasmodium, or Haemaproteus infections in that bird are with the latter parasite. The Cardinal had high levels of both Leucocytozoon and Haemaproteus. Studies of the epizootiology of Haemaproteus in the Red-eyed Vireo, a migrant, and Leucocytozoon in the Cardinal, a permanent resident, have been begun, and point toward local transmission. The pathogenic- ity of these parasites is difficult to assess, but it seems probable that they may be of importance to the welfare of avian populations under par- ticular conditions.
In conjunction with the work on the Whistling Swan, in Chesapeake Bay, studies have been continued by Miss Barbara Holden and Dr. Sladen on infections with the heart worm {Sarconema eurycerca) . This parasite is common in the swans overwintering in the bay and is known to be pathogenic and capable of causing mortality. It is suspected that light infections may not be deleterious, but further study of the relation- ship of infection to behavior, particularly to migration, is under way.
Miss Suzanne Bayley of Johns Hopkins University has continued her research on the distribution, abundance, and diseases of Eurasian Mil- foil {Myriophyllum spicatum) in several estuaries in the bay, including Rhode River. This plant declined significantly (95 percent) between
Archeology. Field work at the Center on aboriginal culture has been continued by Dr. Henry T. Wright of the University of Michigan. The objectives remain those of providing information on the age, size, and characteristics of the sites, in order to allow for explanation of pre- historic cultural developrnent in the middle Chesapeake Bay region. An excavation at the site, "Smithsonian Pier West," has revealed a large shell heap that was occupied during the transition from the Middle to Late Woodland periods, about a.d. 500 to 1000. Deer bones dominate the animal remains, and fragments of pine, oak, and ash (not now found together) have been recovered. Excavation of this and other sites reveals that if we are to add substantially to knowledge concerning seasons of occupation, proportions of tool types, or the contribution of various foods to the diet, a sample of small excavation units from each site will be necessary. Some 35 to 40 sites now have been located on the lands comprising the Center, dating back to 500 b.c.
Land-use History. In any effort to understand the present nature, distribution, and abundance of plant and animal communities at the Center, the nature of the soils supporting them, the drainage patterns, and the history of sedimentation with its associated estuarine changes, it is essential to have detailed information on the history of previous land use. This fact extends to prehistoric management of the land and especially to that since the arrival of western man. Mr. Daniel Higman of the Center staff" has continued his studies in this area, and the data are now in manuscript form. Prior to human settlement, the Chesa- peake Bay area was covered by a heterogeneous hardwood forest whose structure and ecology have been tentatively reconstructed. The arrival of settiers in the period 1649-1652 presaged a general devastation of the plant and animal communities of the region. There followed three fairly well-defined periods with particular sequences of land use : the Exploi- tation Period (1650-1775), the Reconstruction Period (1775-1850),
Undergraduate and Graduate Students. Graduate students from Johns Hopkins University, including Mrs. Penny Williamson, Miss Suzanne Bayley, Mr. David Ainley (feeding ecology of Whistling Swans) , and Mr. David Dyer (ecology of the Diamond-backed Terrapin), have conducted studies at the Center. The National Science Foundation, through a cooperative program with the Smithsonian Institution, has supported the avian ecology work of Mr. Paul Fine of Oberlin College, Miss Mary Faegin of Duke University, and Mr. William Wiggin of Colorado State University. Mr. William Zimmerman (artist) has pro- vided his own support for work at the Center on his portfolio of paint- ings of North American waterfowl. The Department of Vertebrate Zoology has provided support for the training of Mr. Sherif Terwik (Egypt) in the techniques of mist-netting birds and in the collection of ectoparasites and blood samples. This training has been done in cooperation with the Palearctic Migratory Bird Survey.
Dr. Dell H. Hymes Department of Anthropology University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104
Dr. Glaude Levi-Strauss Laboratoire d'Anthropologie Sociale 1 1 , place Marcelin-berthelot Paris 5, France
Dr. J. R. Napier Unit of Primate Biology Smithsonian Institution Queen Elizabeth Gollege Gampden Hill Road London W.8 England
Dr. Sherwood L. Washburn Department of Anthropology University of Galifomia Berkeley, Galifomia 94720
Dr. Wilcomb E. Washburn Department of American Studies Smithsonian Institution Washington, D.G. 20560
Ocean Eagle oil spill, San Juan, Puerto Rico, 3 March 1968. Eflfect of oil on marine life. A team of marine biologists from the Department of Marine Sciences, University of Puerto Rico, studied the eflfects of the oil and detergents, used to emulsify the oil, on the marine flora and fauna. (Photo courtesy Dr. Cirame Vivas, Department of Marine Sciences, University of Puerto Rico.)
FOR OVER A DECADE THIS MUSEUM has been concerned with the solution of a somewhat unusual problem — preservation of the material record of a science that is essentially new but developing with such a rapidity that it forces the historian to accelerate his deliberation. The material record of technological innovation in the steam engine and the electric telegraph can be assembled in leisurely fashion. This is clearly not the case with the record of scientific and technical devel- opment in nuclear energy. In the following section, the Museum pro- gram for collection in this field is described by its initiator, Dr. Philip Bishop.
The Museum was fortunate in securing as consultant, the nuclear physicist Dr. Clyde R. Cowan, Jr., of the Catholic University of
One 60-millionth of an ounce of plutonlum 239 with its dis- coverers, Glenn T, Seaborg and Emilio Segre. The sample, on the disc at Dr. Seaborg's finger tip, is in the original cigar box in which it was placed after the discovery in 1940.
Archeological aide Richard Muzzrole shows Mr. V. Ward Boswell of Alexandria, Virginia, a piece of kiln furniture from the Henry Piercy pottery (active 1792-1801) located on his property.
Edwin Battison has been awarded a citation by the Smithsonian Insti- tution for his activity in selecting for translation Russian works on the history of technology. Mr. Battison's contribution, as the citation states, is virtually to revolutionize the knowledge of the English reader of early technology in Russia. In the course of the year, Mr. Battison also has completed a documentary film on the manufacture of ax handles by using primitive equipment that includes the pattern lathe of the type developed by Thomas Blanchard about 1840.
The Josiah K. Lilly collection of gold coins, which was acquired this year, is the most important single acquisition ever received by the Numismatic Division. This collection includes a virtually complete series of official issues of the United States and an unparalleled series of pioneer and territorial issues. The Latin American section is outstand- ing for its nearly complete series of Spanish colonial issues from Mexico, Peru, Chile, and Bolivia. Other numismatic rarities have been received from Mrs. Henry Norweb, Mr. and Mrs. Mortimer L. Neinken, Dr. Sidney A. Peerless, and, through their continued generosity, from Mr. Willis H. DuPont and members of the Stack family of New York. From the latter, the Department has received the original galvano model for Christian Gobrecht's famous "defiant eagle" design (circa 1838), the first known example of the use of electro deposition processes in coin manufacture in the United States.
In connection with a research project dealing with the movement and handling of mail, the Department has assembled a collection of objects ranging from a letterbox of Boyd's City Express (New York) of the 1840s, given by Leo Scarlet, to the "Transorama" mail-sorting machine installed in 1957 at Silver Spring, Maryland. More conven- tional additions to the philatelic collections have included materials related to Palestine under Turkish rule, from Sidney N. Shure, and the personal philatelic collection of Amelia Earhart, including a number of rare covers, given by Mrs. Elsie M. Williamson.
The range of acquisitions during the year perhaps is best illustrated by the diamond-encrusted (450 diamonds) medal Order of the Golden Fleece, made in 1849 by order of the Prince of Lobkowitz, Duke of Raudnitz, and the "Bible quilt," depicting stories from the Old and New Testaments, which was exhibited in the Athens, Georgia, Cotton Fair of 1886 by an elderly Negro farm woman identified only as Harriet. The former was given by Mrs. Marjorie Merriweather Post; the latter, by Mr. and Mrs. H. M. Heckman.
The Copp collection, one of the most notable extant collections of materials representing the history of a single family, has been aug- mented by the receipt of Johathan Copp's "great chair" (as described in his 18th-century inventory) from Miss Catherine B. Avery. A pictorial record of Negro life in rural Florida in the 1930s has been provided in seven oil paintings given by the artist, Henry Hutchinson Shaw; and the collection of Spanish-American materials has been augmented by a figure of the flagellated Christ, Jesus Nazareno, made in New Mex- ico about 1900.
The most notable acquisition in the field of American culture for the post-Civil War era has been a 60,000-piece pictorial center table, to- gether with tools, inlay fragments, and awards pertaining to the maker, Peter C. Glass, a German-American master of inlay furniture. The table was the gift of Mrs. Frank Vidano.
Order of the Golden Fleece, containing approximately 450 diamonds. This outstanding his- torical piece was made in 1849 by order of Prince Lobkowitz, Duke of Raudnitz. Some of its parts, including the fleece as such, may date from the 18th century. (Donated by Mrs. Merri weather Post.)
The Department has received memorabilia of the presidency ranging from the administration of George Washington to that of Richard Nixon, the most important items being a portrait of Mrs. Benjamin Harrison by Lilly Martin Spencer, presented by Mrs. Donald R. Gates, and the gavel used at the 1968 Republican National Convention, presented by Congressman Gerald R. Ford. Other notable acquisitions in this cate-
Archeological activity in Alexandria, Virginia, and Fort Michili- mackinac, Michigan, has yielded artifacts that are reported under "Research" for Cultural History. The work of the preservation labora- tory has been facilitated by technical changes that make possible several simultaneous electrolytic reductions in the preservation of submerged objects and by the volunteer work of Mrs. Florence Homey in the res- toration of ceramic artifacts.
In the departmental reorganization, which is represented for the first time in this report, the collections relating to nuclear energy have been transferred to the Department of Science and Technology. A decade of collecting activity in the field is reported by Philip Bishop in the intro- duction to the Museum report. Dr. Bishop's continued efforts during the year have led to notable additions to the collection : the proton nuclear accelerator of 1956-57, which is associated with the Nobel Prize work of Luis W. Alvarez, and "Scylla I," the first thermonuclear reactor for peaceful purposes, developed at the University of California, to which we are indebted for the acquisition.
The Department also has received, from a pioneer developer of the electron microscope, L. Marton, a reproduction of his first instrument, made in Belgium in 1932. In addition, the Department has acquired two of the earliest instruments developed in this country after Dr. Marton had joined RCA in 1938. One of these, from Colorado State University, is from the first group of six instruments produced by RCA after
Individual objects of particular significance received this year are a David Ramsay table clock of about 1630, which is one of the oldest English clocks extant, a nuclear magnetic resonance cavity, from E. M. Purcell and R. B. Pound, which was used in experiments for which Purcell shared a Nobel Prize with Felix Bloch in 1952 (a magnet rep- resenting some of Bloch's later work was received last year) . Some of the first microbalances used in the United States have been received from Mrs. Wilbur Patterson.
This production was followed by "Hail to the Chief," a spectacular exhibit on the history of presidential inaugurations that opened 8 Jan- uary. Prepared by Margaret B. Klapthor, the exhibit presented in his- torical content treasured memorabilia ranging from the balcony railing from which Washington took his oath of office to the gowns worn at several inaugural balls. Taped recordings of campaign songs and silent movies recreated inaugurals of presidents from McKinley to Coolidge. As a supplement, a display of the historical development of the Inaug- ural Medal was prepared by Mrs. Elvira E. Clain-Stefanelli especially for the inaugural ceremonies held in the Museum in January 1969.
Undoubtedly the most dramatic of the Musuem's special exhibits has been the display, also prepared by Mrs. Clain-Stefanelli, of the entire collection of 6,135 gold coins assembled by the late Josiah K. Lilly and presented to the Smithsonian.
In the Hall of Medical Sciences a display of modern developments in surgical instrumentation has featured instruments driven by com- pressed air for operating at ultra-high speed, instruments that were designed and produced by Dr. Robert Hall and now are widely used to perform difficult operations not previously possible.
A special exhibit commemorating "Human Rights Year" has been installed in the Hall of Historic Americans, where the continuing strug- gle for human rights in America is depicted. Articles on display range from materials relating to Abolition, Emancipation, the Women's Rights movement, and the efforts of Negroes from 1830 to 1968 to gain full rights, the latter climaxed by a memorial to Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Under contract with the Freer, Joseph M. Upton is translating and organizing Professor Ernst E. Herzfeld's archives, and Mrs. Elisabeth West FitzHugh is assisting Rutherford J. Gettens in the study of the technical aspects of the Japanese paintings of the Ukiyoe school at the Freer.
In September 1968 Mr. Robert Tyler Davis came to ncfa to be assistant director. Trained at Harvard, where he earned both his ab and ma, Mr. Davis has had many years of museum experience, having been director at the Portland, Oregon, museum and the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts. He organized the James Deering estate "Vizcaya" at Miami, Florida, as the Dade County Art Museum. He has also been professor of fine arts at McGill University and at the University of Miami. Since his arrival here, Mr. Davis has organized a curatorial committee with weekly meetings for exchange of information and dis- cussion of problems, and has guided several other projects.
Dr. Scott resigned as director, effective 31 May 1969, and Mr. Davis was named acting director as of 1 June.
The curator of prints and drawings, Jacob Kainen, has continued his research on American prints and drawings and on the work of Stanley William Hayter and his influence on 20th-century printmaking. Mr. Kainen has juried the Art Show at the National Institute of Health and an exhibition for the Print Club of Philadelphia. He has lectured in the "Masters in Depth" Smithsonian Associates Lecture Series, has partici- pated in a symposium on art collecting at Winston-Salem, North Car- olina, and has spoken at the opening of the Gorky exhibition at the University of Maryland on "Memories of Arshile Gorky," Mr. Kainen also has attended the meetings of the Directors and Executive Com- mittee of the Print Council of America. He has written the foreword for the forthcoming publication of John Sloan's Prints by Peter Morse and an introduction to the catalog for the Werner Drewes Woodcuts exhibition. The Drewes exhibition was selected by research assistant Caril D. Dulcan, who also compiled material for the catalog.
Jan Keene Muhlert, assistant in the Department of Contemporary Art and Lending Program advisor, has taught a ten-week course, "Understanding Contemporary American Art," for Smithsonian Associ- ates and has juried shows for the Academy of Arts, Easton, Maryland ("Annual Art Festival"), George Washington University, Washington, D.C. ("Spring Art Festival"), and the Job Corps, Washington, D.C. ("First National Job Corps Art Competition"). She has concentrated her research activities on works done in the 1930s under the Works Progress Administration and, in preparation for a future exhibition, is studying the large collection of paintings, watercolors, and prints by William H. Johnson. Since January 1969, Mrs. Muhlert has been re- sponsible for the Lending Program, organizing three special exhibitions in the White House and arranging numerous loans to principal gov- ernmental offices.
The opening ceremonies, with addresses by Secretary Ripley and Mayor Washington, were held in the courtyard of the Fine Arts and Portrait Galleries Building on a cool and clear Saturday evening, 5 Oc- tober 1968, followed by an opening for the Smithsonian Associates the next day. The public opening took place on Monday, 7 October. Pre- ceding the opening ceremonies out-of-town guests were entertained at private dinners organized by a committee of volunteers under the chair- manship of Mrs. Robert Kintner.
The lending of a large amount of original material by Dr. Andrew Longacre and members of the Longacre family, descendants of the artist, have given the exhibition its particular charm and interest. Many of the engravings shown have come from the extensive print collections trans- ferred to the Gallery as gifts from the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Joseph Verner Reed Collection and from the Robbins Print Collection, Arlington, Massachusetts. In this same exhibition, a bronze version of the bust of Lyndon Baines Johnson by Jimilu Mason also was shown as a loan from the artist.
Many gaps in the staff need to be filled, but these appointments await the director's successor, Marvin S. Sadik, previously director of the Uni- versity of Connecticut Museum of Art at Storrs. Mr. Sadik is a graduate with honors from Harvard, where he also did his graduate work. He received his initial museum training as assistant to Francis Henry Taylor at Worcester. Immediately before going to Storrs, Mr. Sadik was director of the Bowdoin College Museum of Art in Brunswick, Maine. In his previous posts he has become known for a series of spirited exhi- bitions. He is the author of several distinguished catalogs, particularly one of the Bowdoin collection of family portraits at that college. He is young, experienced, venturesome, and, best of all, really interested in portraiture. The Gallery may look forward to an outstanding regime under his directorship.
For its initial year of operation, the Gallery, with no formal educa- tional program because of austerity, has been fortunate from February to May 1969 in having, under the chairmanship of Mrs. Paul Johnston,
Assisting Mrs. Stephenson as volunteers in the print archives have been Miss Julia Loewe, Mrs. Charles Nagel, and Mrs. Stuart Symington. Thanks to these ladies, a total of 38,261 portrait prints and photographs have been sorted and accessioned.
Mr. Stewart and the director have addressed in the Office of Academic Programs a group of summer students inquiring into the history and purposes of museum exhibits: "The Art Gallery — Its History and Foundation."
Mrs. Purdy, keeper of the Catalogue, gave a paper at the annual convention of the American Association for State and Local History in a session entitled "Automation in Pursuit of History." She has spoken to the area chapters for both the Reference Division of the American Library Association and the American Studies Association about the developing Catalogue of American Portraits. She also has spoken on "Portraits as Historical Documents" at a membership meeting of the Colonial Dames of America in Chicago, Illinois.
Mr. Walker, the librarian, attended an institute on "The Introduction to Modem Archives Management," held at the National Archives, 2-13 June 1969. The following week (16-20 June) he served on the faculty of an Institute on Art Librarianship that was held at the State Univer- sity of New York at Buffalo, where he presented a paper on his work with the Library of Congress in revising the L.C. classification schedule for books on the fine arts, Class N.
Mrs. Aleita Hogenson, reference librarian, attended the annual con- ference of the American Library Association at Atlantic City, New Jersey, 23-27 June 1969. Mrs. Shirley Harren, technical information specialist, attended the Special Libraries Association's annual meeting in Montreal, Canada, 1-6 June 1969.
Because the vacancy in the position of historian has not been filled and Mrs. Virginia C. Purdy, formerly assistant historian, has been made
The work of the Department has been carried on by two temporary research assistants under Mrs. Purdy's supervision. They have completed the research and writing still needed on the catalog This New Man, and one of them, Elizabeth T. Heck, has made an outstanding contribution to the opening exhibition by assuming responsibility for locating and arranging to borrow the associative objects that gave an additional dimension to the exhibition.
Mrs. Beverly Cox has selected the sitters and supervised the historical arrangement of the exhibition of portraits from the permanent collec- tion that was hung in the second floor galleries in January 1969. She also has taken charge of the Gallery's biolographical file and has par- ticipated in book selection for the library. Both of these assistants have researched and written biographical material for exhibition captions for the permanent collection and the Longacre exhibitions as well as for the use of the Acquisitions Committee in making decisions on additions to the collection.
The permanent staff of the Catalogue of American Portraits has con- sisted of the aforementioned keeper and two research assistants, Mrs. Mona Dearborn in art history and Miss Dorothy Brewer in American history. In addition there have been two temporary catalogers for part of the year.
Mrs. Genevieve Stephenson serves in the dual role of reference librar- ian for the Catalogue of American Portraits and picture librarian for the Gallery's picture collection, which contains 38,261 prints and photo- graphs. Twenty-two scholars have used the manual file of the cap and the picture collection in the first five months of 1969, and ninety-eight reference requests have been answered by the staff by phone or by cor- respondence during the year. The picture collection has been augmented
During the year the library acquired and is housing in the southeast section of the fourth floor stack area the files of the Prevention of Deterioration Center, which represents a ten-year project conducted by Dr. Carl J. Wessel and sponsored by the National Research Council. Since these files are of general interest to the Smithsonian, they may eventually be housed elsewhere in the Institution. On the top floor of the library, there are files of material of New Deal Art Projects operating between 1933 and 1943 and the Holger Cahill files, which consist of papers and photographs from the Washington office of the late director of the wpa federal art project. This material has been as- sembled and organized by Dr. Francis V, O'Connor, who has also written a handbook to facilitate the use of the files.
Many professionals have visited the library during the year including members of Winterthur's Graduate Program, the Woodlawn Conference under the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the Reference Serv- ices Division of the Maryland branch of the American Library Associa- tion, a seminar group from the Fogg Art Museum, and individuals such as Mrs. Fredo Goldman, art reference librarian of the Johnannesburg Public Library; Dr. Jan Kriz of the Institute of History of Art, Prague; and Miss Helen Lowenthal of the Victorian Society of London.
Handicapped with lack of staff, Mr. Walker and his assistants have continued to give first-rate service to the two musemns and to the public.
With a small acquisitions budget, the library is especially grateful for donations to the collections. The largest single gift for the year is that of Mrs. Adelyn Breeskin's personal library.
Museum of Art Jonathan Bryan Mrs. John Dewey St. Elizabeths Hospital Library of Congress Rhode Island Historical
The Pierpont Morgan Library, New York City Mrs. Andrew Van Pelt Lord Primrose, D. L National Gallery of Art
Society Andrew Longacre Amherst College John Hampton Games Mrs. E. DuPont Irving Mrs. William Hacker Andrew Longacre John Clarkson Jay
Athenaeum Mrs. Phillip Holt Lowry Andrew Longacre Carter Lee Refo Andrew Longacre Mrs. Milton Cornell
Philadelphia Andrew Longacre Mrs. William Hacker Andrew Longacre Andrew Longacre Andrew Longacre Andrew Longacre
Victor Proetz Fund Victor Proetz Fund Victor Proetz Fund Victor Proetz Fund Gift of Mrs. Alcott F. Elwell Gift of Mrs. Alcott F. Elwell
On 8 January 1969 President Lyndon B. Johnson and Joseph H. Hirshhom broke ground for the Joseph H. Hirshhom Museum and Sculpture Garden. President Johnson, Mr. Hirshhom, Secretary Ripley, Chief Justice Earl Warren addressed the distinguished guests, who in- cluded Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, architects of the new Museum, the Smithsonian Institution Board of Regents, Con- gressional leaders, and prominent members of the government and the art world. Director Abram Lerner, assistant curator Cynthia J. Jaffee, historian Frances R. Shapiro, and registrar Thomas J. Girard repre- sented the Hirshhom Museum at the historic event.
In 1969 Mr. Hirshhorn's enthusiasm and generosity again led to the addition of over five hundred new paintings and sculptures to the super- lative collection of fine art he has donated to the United States for the benefit of the people.
Ground-breaking ceremony, 8 January 1969: (left to right) Chief Justice Warren, Secretary Ripley, Mr. Hirshhorn, President Johnson. (Photo by Jack Rottier, National Park Service.)
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING the takc-ovcr of the Cooper Union Museum by the Smithsonian on 1 July 1968, the Museum's name was changed to Cooper-Hewitt Museum of Design, thus honoring Peter Cooper, founder of the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, and his granddaughters, the Misses Sarah, Eleanor, and Amy Hewitt, who were the Museum's founders in 1897. An Advisory Board was established, bylaws drawn up, and members chosen from the Com- mittee To Save the Cooper Union Museum, headed by Henry Francis du Pont and other interested persons. Following Mr. du Font's death, Mrs. Jacob M. Kaplan, the Board's vice-chairman, was appointed to fill the vacant chairmanship. Members of the Advisory Board are as follows :
In addition to work performed by staff members, the Museum has been fortunate to have the services of four faithful volunteers — Donald Gurney, Mrs. E. Elizabeth Page, Hubbell Pierce, and Mrs. Morton J. Seifter — who put in a total of 870 hours of work during the year. Special projects worked on by volunteers have included tabulating and checking of box and storage lists in the Department of Drawings and Prints and that of Textiles, affixing accession numbers and measuring of textiles, assisting at the reception desk and with record-keeping in the office of the Registrar, and maintaining and posting of mailing lists and donors lists. Through the dependability of its volunteer services, the Museum has been able to go forward with its housekeeping chores.
Anonymous (2) Mrs. Daniel Putnam Adams Advisory Board of the Cooper-Hewitt Mu- seum of Design American Institute of Interior Designers America-Israel Cultural Foundation Miss Stell Andersen Mrs. Anne Arbuckle Dr. and Mrs. Lewis Balamuth Miss Muriel F. Barnes Miss Alice B. Beer Dr. Gertrude Bilhuber Bernard Black
Estate of Mrs. Berthilde D. Bullowa Mrs. Xenia Cage Estate of Miss Ethel Chase Clarence House Fabrics Miss Lois Clarke Miss Katherine Cornell Peter Cotton AUyn Cox
Davis Brody and Associates, Architects Mrs. Mildred J. Davis Mrs. M. Walter Daub Harry Dennis, Jr. Miss Elizabeth Dennison Jack Denst Designs, Inc. Doyle, Dane, Bernbach, Inc. Mrs. W. G. Dunnington, Jr. George G. Fino Miss Eliane Flach Mrs. Anne McDonnell Ford Maurice M. Friedman Dr. George V. Gallenkamp Mrs. Benjamin Ginsburg Rube Goldberg Ben Goldstein Countess Alvise Gozzi Graf Wallpapers, Inc. Mrs. William Ford Goulding Mr. and Mrs. Rodman A. Heeren Mr. and Mrs. Maxime Hermanos Mrs. David Herselle Mrs. Thomas Hess Mr. and Mrs. R. W. Hickman Miss Sheila Hicks Mrs. Harry L. Holland, Jr. Mrs. Revell Hoover
International Business Machines Corpora- tion Interpublic Group of Companies, Inc. Tetsuzo Inumaru Mrs. Deane F. Johnson Mrs. Orrin F. Judd Jacques Jugeat Orrin Wickersham June William Justema Mrs. Jacob M. Kaplan William Katzenbach Miss Amy R. Knox LaVerne International Derek Lee Mrs. C. W. Lester Mrs. Germaine Little Mrs. Willard E. Loeb Louis W. Bowen, Inc. McCann-Erickson Paul Manheim Karl Mann Associates Frits Markus Miss Marian Miller Bob Mitchell Designs
During the year the Library has been enriched by the addition of 547 books, of which 354 have come through gifts from sixty-five donors, and 193 through purchase. The most important single gift has been that of 124 general reference books, largely in the field of French 18th-century art, and 57 rare books, from the bequest of Mary Hay ward Weir. The rare books from the Weir estate include a number of fine bindings from the libraries of Cardinal Mazarin, Anne of Austria, the due d'Orleans and others, as well as illustrated works by Arthur Rackham, Kate Green- away, and W. Russell Flint. Significant purchases include Walter and Smith's A Guide to Workers in Metal, 4 volumes, Philadelphia, 1846; Kokuho, National Treasures of Japan, 6 volumes in twelve parts, Tokyo, 1963-67; and Textiles in the Shosoin, 2 volumes, Tokyo, 1963. The last- named item has been acquired through funds generously contributed by Mrs. Vincent Astor.
Side chair with needlepoint embroidered silk upholstery, possibly Austrian, circa 1907. (Given to the Cooper-Hewitt Museum by Mrs. Peter J. Perry.)
Mrs. Blackv/elder has served as national chairman of the Membership Committee of the Special Libraries Association, Museum Division.
Mrs. Dee delivered a public lecture, "Pleasures and Palaces in 18th- Century Italy," at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts in Richmond, 6 January 1969. She also has served on the National Exhibitions Com- mittee of the American Federation of Arts.
Miss Beer has given two public lectures, "Embroidery Designs in the Cooper-Hewitt Museum," at Old Sturbridge Village, Sturbridge, Massa- chusetts, 27 January 1969, and "17th- and 18th-Century Textiles Used in American Colonial Houses," at the Bowne House, Flushing, New York, 1 2 May. She also has served as a board member of the Embroiders' Guild.
Secretary Ripley and Dr. Blitzer are introduced to some of the problems of aircraft restoration by Curator Louis Casey.
On 12 July 1968, a giant SP-5B Martin Marlin (often called a P5M) , last of a line of navy seaplanes spanning half a century, landed at Patuxent River Naval Air Station, Maryland, at the end of a sentimental farewell flight from North Island Naval Air Station, San Diego, Cali- fornia. Vice Admiral Thomas F. Connolly, Deputy Chief of Naval Oper- ations for Air, presented the forty-ton craft to the Smithsonian Institu- tion. Mr. John Nicholas Brown, Advisory Board chairman, noted in his acceptance speech that
Mr. James S. Hutchins, assistant director, has continued work on a book about the development of United States cavalry saddles and bridles, 1833-1916, and pursued his studies of the role of the armed forces in westward expansion and of the development of animal-drawn and animal-borne military transport and the field equipment of the individual soldier.
Mr. James J. Stokesberry, staff historian, has continued research into the strategic, economic, and sociological aspects of naval ship design and naval operations during the American Civil War period, as exem- plified by the monitor Tecumseh.
The Smithsonian Institution contracted with Mr. Ralph G, Schwarz, president of the Urban Design and Development Corporation, a non- profit District of Columbia corporation established by the American
During the summer of 1968, Dr. Washburn and Mr. Skramstad par- ticipated, with historian Constance McLaughlin Green and planner Frederick Gutheim, in a joint Smithsonian-George Washington Uni- versity Summer Institute in American Studies on the subject of "The Growth and Emergence of Washington as the Nation's Capital." Fifteen students from all over the country participated in the seminar.
In July 1968 Mr. Skramstad organized the Smithsonian portion of an East- West Center Program in American Studies (offered in conjunction with George Washington University and the Library of Congress) for Oriental students in graduate school.
During the year a Historical Laboratories Program has begun to evolve under the direction of Mr. Skramstad in which graduate stu- dents and staff could work together on common historical problems involving specific historical sites. Tentative arrangements are being developed so that St. Mary's City and Annapolis, Maryland, and Wash- ington, D.C. can serve as historical laboratories for studies in 17th-, 18th-, and 19th-century American history.
Dr. Washburn, during his sabbatical, has presented scholarly papers at the Colloquium on Early Brazilian History sponsored by the Instituto Historico e Geografico Brasileiro in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and at the International Meeting on the History of Nautical Science sponsored by the University of Coimbra, Portugal. In addition, he has commented on several papers on "Science in America: New Interpretations" at the annual meeting of the American Historical Association; has par- ticipated in a panel discussion at a Conference on the Legal Rights of Indians in the Twentieth Century, which was sponsored by the Law Schools of the University of North Dakota and the University of Mani- toba, at Grand Forks, North Dakota; and has presented a paper on ex- hibit techniques at a National Park Service Seminar at Grand Canyon, Arizona.
Mr. Harold Skramstad has presented a paper on the subject of museum-university cooperation in higher education at a meeting of the New England Conference of the American Associations of Museums.
During the year, Dr. Washburn was elected to membership in the American Antiquarian Society, was elected to the executive council of the American Studies Association as Member-at-Large for History, was named to the Board of Visitors of the Peabody Museum of Archeology and Ethnology at Harvard University, and was elected vice president of the Japan- America Society of Washington.
Mr. Welsh participated on three occasions at the New York State Historical Association at Cooperstown in seminars on the use and pres- entation of nonverbal material in teaching social studies. In addition, he has taught a seminar in the Cooperstown Graduate Program that investigated the attitudes and values in American naive art. He con- tinues to serve as editor of the Smithsonian Journal of History.
Planning for the Smithsonian's participation in the Bicentennial of the American Revolution, the events leading to it, and the subsequent development of the United States, has been accelerated through the efforts of John J. Slocum, a Foreign Service Information Officer detailed by the United States Information Agency in February 1969 to serve as Special Assistant for Bicentennial Planning. Mr. Slocum, has had extensive experience in international exhibitions and celebrations both in this country and abroad.
Mrs. Samuel K. B. Asante of Ghana examines a work of sculpture in the "African Interlude" exhibit with Mrs. Willie Mae Pelham, museum aide in the Division of Cultural Anthropology.
Mrs. Terezia Takacs works on a» design for the philately special exhibit Commonwealth in Africa and the Caribbean.
Participating in many of the training programs, as well as in the per- manent and special exhibitions, in By-word, in numerous tape record- ings, and in other exhibits-related material has been the Exhibits Edi- tor's office under the direction of Mrs. Constance Minkin. The writing, editing, and typographic services of this unit in 1969 have included the production of approximately 14,000 labels, ten leaflets, brochures, and directories, and the coauthorship of a popular publication supple- mentary to the Philately Hall.
Mrs. Van Arsdale has been a guest at many of the monthly meetings of the cultural attaches and has given a talk on sites to a monthly meeting of the counselors. She has attended openings in Philadelphia, New York, Pittsburgh, and Toronto, has appeared on Danish television in connection with the exhibit 140 Years of Danish Glass, and she has recorded a program for "Capital Assignments" on the Mutual network.
Dr. Mason Hale from the De- partment of Botany teaches a young scholarship girl how to examine specimens under the microscope. This course is one of many given on a variety of subjects for young Associates and scholarship children from local schools.
Mrs. Lisa Suter has resigned as program director. She was replaced by Mrs. Susan Hamilton on 1 July 1969. Mr. Marlin Johnson has been appointed to the newly created position of program manager.
Bruce Mrs. Morris Gafritz The Honorable Douglas Dillon Mr. Charles E. Eckles The Honorable and Mrs. John Clifford
Mr. Cornelius Van S. Roosevelt Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. P. A. B. Widener Mr. Christian A. Zabriskie Mr. and Mrs. Sidney S. ZIotnick
Colonel and Mrs. Leon Mandel Mr. and Mrs. J. Willard Marriott Mr. William McC. Martin, Jr. Lieutenant Commander and Mrs
Maveety Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon Miss Katherine A. A. Murphy Neuberger Foundation, Inc. Duke of Northumberland Mrs. K. D. Owen Dr. and Mrs. Melvin M. Payne Miss Lucy M. Pollio Mrs. Merriweather Post Mr. Peter Powers Miss Elsie Howland Quinby Dr. and Mrs. S. Dillon Ripley Mr. and Mrs. Seymour J. Rubin Mr. H. C. Seherr-Thoss Mrs. Jouett Shouse Dr. and Mrs. Carl Swan Shultz Mr. Robert T. Smith Mr. and Mrs. Bertrand L. Taylor HI Mrs. Clark W. Thompson Mrs. Carll Tucker Mr. Alexander O. Victor Mr. and Mrs. John W. Warner Dr. Alexander Wetmore Mr. and Mrs. W. Bradley Willard Mrs. Rose Saul Zalles
Frelinghuysen Miss Mary S. Gardner Mr. T. Jack Gary Mr. W. E. Gathright Mr. and Mrs. Joseph T. Geuting, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. T. K. Glennan Mr. and Mrs. Charles C. Glover IH Mrs. Katherine Graham Mrs. Philip L. Graham Dr. Sheila H. Gray Mr. and Mrs. Homer Gudelsky Mr. Henry Clay Hofheimer II Mr. Arthur A. Houghton, Jr. Miss EHsabeth Houghtcm Mrs. Edward F. Hutton Mr. and Mrs. Frank Joyce The Honorable and Mrs. R. A. Kidder Mr. and Mrs. Dan A. Kimball Mr. David I. Kreeger
Patterson Mr. Charles Emory Phillips Mr. James H. Ripley Mrs. John Barry Ryan Mrs. John Farr Sinmions Mr. and Mrs. Samuel A. Stern Dr. and Mrs. T. Dale Stewart Mrs. Edward C. Sweeney Martha Frick Symington, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. Joseph A. Toro Mr. and Mrs. Middleton Train Mr. and Mrs. Russell Train Mr. and Mrs. E. Russell True, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Robert D. van Roijen Mr. George C. Webster Mr. and Mrs. William S. Weedon Miss Helena M. Weiss Mr. and Mrs. Donald L. White Mr. and Mrs. J. R. Wiggins Mr. and Mrs. J. Burke Wilkinson Mrs. Orme Wilson Mr. and Mrs. Mark Winkler
Abbott Mr. and Mrs. Stanley N. Allan Mr. and Mrs. Ralph E. Becker The Honorable Frances P. Bolton Mrs. Linda C. Burgess Mr. and Mrs. Frank Caplan Mr. George L. Chapel Mr. and Mrs. Wallace M. Cohen Mr. and Mrs. B. C. Connelly Mr. and Mrs. Harold Coolidge Mrs. Chester Dale Mrs. Albert H. Ely
Smithsonian, Navy Exhibit NC-4 — First Airplane To Fly Atlantic 6-5-69 Two Museum Shops Display Hollywood Posters 6-5-69 Jule Charney and Arie Haagen-Smit Receive Hodgkins Medal 6-5-69 Masada Exhibit Depicts Jewish Zealots' Sacrifice 8-5-69 Official Statement on "Minnesota Iceman" 9-5-69 Smithsonian Last Resting Place for American Horse "Lexington" 9-5-69 Dr. David Scott Resigns as Director of NCFA 9-5-69 "Concerned Photographer" Exhibit Chronicles Historic Events 22-5-69 Josiah K. Lilly and His Gold Coin Collection 23-5-69 Model Plane Championships and Demonstration Held 27—5-69 Pennsylvania Featured State in Annual Folklife Festival 28-5-69 Cafriz Foundation Gift of Calder Sculpture To Be Dedicated 28-5-69 Alexander Calder Biography 28-5-69 Music and Dance of Turkey Presented in Theatre on the Mall 2-6-69 Smithsonian Associates Offer Summer Classes for All Ages 5-6—69 Smithsonian Creates Center for the Study of Man 5-6-69 Oceanographic Design Concepts To Be Exhibited 6-6-69 First United States Showing of Japanese Poster Exhibit at Cooper- Hewitt 1 1-6-69 Electronic Sculpture Exhibited at NCFA 11-6-69 Major Swiss Folk Art Show Exhibited in MHT 1 1-6-69 Sales Exhibition of Appalachia Photos by Tress 11-6-69 Czech Artist's Paintings of Mars on Exhibit 12-6-69 Art Treasures from Tibet Exhibited at NCFA 17-6-69 Equipment Spanning History of Typesetting Gift of Mergenthaler 18-6-69 Children's Theater Will Stage English Fairy Tale 20-6-69 Woodcuts by German Modernist Werner Drewes Exhibited 20-6-69 Gum-Bichromate Prints by Betty Hahn, Gayle Smalley 24-6-69 Berenice Abbott Retrospective Will Open at Smithsonian 24-6-69 Vickers "Vimy" Light Is Honored by Smithsonian 25-6-69 Reeves Telecom Corp. Plans Permanent Appalachian Art Archive 26-6-69 3rd Annual Folklife Festival To Be Held 1-6 July 27-6-69
Groundbreaking Ceremonies for Joseph H. Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden (abc, nbc, cbs-tv). President Lyndon B. Johnson officiated along with Secretary Ripley and Mr. Hirshhorn.
Dedication of a stabile by Alexander Calder on the terrace of the National Museum of History and Technology (nbc, abc-tv). Donated to the Smith- sonian by Mrs. Gwendolyn Cafritz.
Imago (The City Curious) pre- sented by the Alwin Nikolais Dance Theatre, featuring Mur- ray Louis and Phyllis Lamhut, opened the Theatre-on-the- Mall on 22 April 1969. The staging, choreography, cos- tumes, sound score, and lighting were created by Mr. Nikolais.
The National Air and Space Museum and the Museum Shops, in cooperation with the International Plastic Modelers Society, the Acad- emy of Model Aeronautics, and the National Association of Rocketry, sponsored in June 1969 the First Annual Aerospace Modeling Exhibit at the same A&I shop. The exhibition was researched by the curatorial staff and installed by Harry Hart, Winthrop Shaw, and Mr. Hart's exhibit staff. As a side attraction, a special weekend competition of model flightcraft and model rocket launching was held on the Mall. Continual demonstrations by members of model-making groups was a feature of the summer-long exhibition and sale.
Ralph Rinzler and the director researched the Index of American Design at the National Gallery for an exhibition of original watercolor renderings. Contemporary but traditional American crafts were selected by Mr. Rinzler to accompany the paintings. This exhibition was taken
The past year has indeed been one of increased involvement and activity at the Anacostia Neighborhood Museum. The educational pro- grams, directed by Miss Zora Martin, have covered a broad spectrum for guiding children and adults through exhibits and workshops for community reading assistants of the Anacostia Model School Project to special science units led by a part-time teacher on loan from the District of Columbia Board of Education.
Strong library collections attract additional material and thus grow even stronger. The Institution has been the honored recipient of a num- ber of exceptionally important and valuable library collections. Among these are the Dwight-Tucker Ornithological Collection given by Mrs. Carll Tucker; a collection on Ceylon given by Mr. N. A. Forde, a former British army officer who served in that country; and a collection of Chinese reference books from the oriental scholar Dr. Rhea Blue. The close affiliation of the patent examiners and the curators in the National Museum of History and Technology has resulted in the transfer of nearly 40,000 volumes from the Patent Office to the Smithsonian In- stitution — principally pre- 1900 material in technology now quite essen- tial to the study of the development of American science and industry. The American Military Institute has deposited its collection of approxi- mately 10,000 volumes on military history with the Smithsonian, which has placed them in the charge of the National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board. Not as dramatic, but nevertheless as vital, is the steady input of materials obtained through individual gifts and through the exchange of the Smithsonian's own publications with those of other scholarly agencies.
The stature of a research library is in part determined by the quality of its contribution to the world of librarianship. In this effort, commen- surate with the talents and the time of the staff, the Smithsonian Li- braries have been active to the fullest extent possible. The Smithsonian has completed the second of its two-year elected term on the Federal Library Committee, and the director and assistant director continued membership on three of the flg task forces. The affairs of two im- portant segments of the American Library Association have been man- aged within the Smithsonian Institution. The director served as the president of the Information Science and Automation Division, and Carol Raney, head of the Cataloging Division, served as acting president of the Resources and Technical Services Division. Mary Huffer, the assistant director of Libraries, won election as president of the D.C. Chapter of the Special Libraries Association; Jean Chandler Smith assisted in the formation on the national level of the Natural Resources Division of the Association; and Mrs. L. Frances Jones accepted ap- pointment to a subcommittee of the Seminars on the Acquisition of Latin American Library Materials.
New information-retrieval projects are reviewed by participating units. ISD's Reginald Creighton and Dr. Melvin Jackson of NMHT discuss coordinate indexing of ship models as an aid in research activites.
New information-retrieval projects are reviewed by participating units. Dr. Charles Nagel and Mrs. Virginia Purdy of the National Portrait Gallery examine automated catalog of portraits with James Crockett of ISD.
ON 3 DECEMBER 19 68, the Scicnce Information Exchange commemo- rated the twentieth year of its establishment with a program at the National Museum of History and Technology. In attendance were Secretary Ripley and other leaders from the governmental and private scientific and information communities. Dr. Charles W. Shilling, one of the founders and a former chairman of the Governing Board of sie, recalled the early history as a pioneering enterprise in the science infor- mation field. Members of the sie staff briefly reviewed the growth of its data base and the expansion of its usage throughout the national research community. Highlighted were sie's accomplishments in the design, de- velopment, and testing of new methods and techniques in the large scale processing of scientific information.
Dr. V. Clain-Stefanelli, curator of numismatics, receives one of the rare "Jet Age Dollars" from Mr. Herbert D. Ford of American Airlines. The medallion, issued to American Airlines passengers ten years ago on the first transcontinental jet flight, is being admired by Mrs. Clain-Stefanelli and Mrs. Betty V. Strickler. Mrs. Strickler is chief of the Smithsonian's Travel Services Office, where the presentation ceremony was held.
The National Gallery of Art, although technically established as a bureau of the Smithsonian Institution, is an autonomous and separately administered organization and is governed by its own Board of Trustees. The statutory members of such Board are the Chief Justice of the United States, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, ex officio. The five General Trustees continuing in office during the fiscal year ended 30 June 1969, are Paul Mellon, John Hay Whitney, Dr. Franklin D. Murphy, Lessing J. Rosemvald, and Stoddard M. Stevens. On 1 May 1969, Paul Mellon was re-elected by the Board of Trustees to serve as President of the Gallery, and John Hay Whitney was re-elected Vice President.
Gifts of money and securities have been made by Avalon Foundation, Mrs. Ailsa Mellon Bruce, Mr. Thomas Gardiner Corcoran, J. I. Foundation, Inc., Samuel H. Kress Foundation, Mrs. Cordelia S. May, The A. W. Mellon Educational and Charitable Trust, Mr. Paul Mellon, Old Dominion Foundation, and others.
Rosenwald Collection. 18 April through 24 June 1969. John Constable, A Selection of Paintings from the Collection of Mr. and Mrs.
The program of the Educational Department has been carried out under the direction of Dr. Margaret Bouton, curator in charge of educa- tional work. Attendance figures for the series of lectures, tours, and special talks are as follows :
Starting in February 1969, the Extension Service in cooperation with the Boardman School in Youngstown, Ohio, has conducted a series of four telephone lectures featuring members of the Gallery's curatorial staff. In February Dr. Grose Evans gave the first lecture on Renais- sance Art; in March Dr. Margaret Bouton gave the second lecture on American Art; in April Dr. Evans spoke on 19th-century French Painting; and in May George Kuebler presented Contemporary Art. The slides for each lecture had been forwarded in advance of the lec- ture date. On the day of the lecture, the staff member was connected by long-distance phone with the school. After a short presentation by the staff member, the students were able to talk with the lecturer and ask questions about the presentation. Reports from the Youngstown school indicate that the series has been very successful.
The library, under the direction of Miss Anna M. Link, has acces- sioned by gift, exchange, and purchase 2,381 books, pamphlets, and periodicals; has processed 2,217 publications; has filed 7,670 cards in the main catalog and shelf list; has received by gift, exchange, or pur- chase 3,578 periodicals; has charged to staff members 5,112 books; has
Two National Gallery Orchestra concerts conducted by Mr. Bales were taped for two one-hour color television programs, which were shown with appropriate paintings from the Gallery's collections on WTOP-TV in November 1968 and February 1969.
The full orchestra and the National Gallery Strings, conducted by Mr. Bales, have performed for several special openings at the Gallery and also have performed as part of the 20th Anniversary Celebration of Falls Church, Virginia, and for the Bowie May Festival in Bowie, Maryland. The National Gallery Strings recorded the sound track for the NBC-TV film, Art and the Bible, which was televised nationally on Palm Sunday 1969.
Mr. Bales' activities during the year have included several talks on music, an appearance on wrc-tv to discuss his compositions and his work at the National Gallery of Art, and chairmanship of the Music Sub-Committee for the Governors' and Distinguished Guests' Reception at the Sheraton Park Hotel, one of the pre-Inaugural events in January 1969. A number of Mr. Bales' compositions have been per- formed by the Gallery orchestra during the season and by orchestras in other cities. The orchestral score of Mr. Bales' National Gallery Suite No. 3: "American Design" has been published by Alexander Broude, Inc., of New York City.
In a major effort to characterize the pigments employed by a specific painter, the National Gallery of Art has encouraged and sponsored Dr. Hermann Kiihn of the Doemer Institut, Munich, in an extensive investi- gation of the pigments used by the seventeenth-century Dutch master Vermeer. This research, extending over a period of more than two years, provides detailed analytical data concerning twenty-nine paintings by Vermeer (out of a total number of thirty-five attribued to this artist by the Dutch authority A. B. de Vries) .
Funds for the new building have been donated by Paul Mellon and Mrs. Ailsa Mellon Bruce. Construction was authorized by the Act approved 5 July 1968, Public Law 90-376, 82 Stat. 286.
On 30 June 1969 Mr. John Walker, director, and Mr. Perry B. Cott, chief curator, retired from the Gallery staff.
Mr. Walker has been associated with the Gallery since 1938; he helped in the design of the building and supervised the installation of the Andrew W. Mellon Collection and the Samuel H. Kress Collection prior to the opening of the Gallery in 1941. He was chief curator until 1956, when he was appointed director on the retirement of the Gallery's first director, Mr. David E. Finley. Mr. Walker and Mr. Finley, respec- tively, were given the title of director emeritus at the May 1969 meeting of the trustees.
Mr. Walker is succeeded by the deputy director, Mr. John Carter Brown, who has been on the Gallery staff since 1961.
Mr. Cott has been on the Gallery staff since 1949 and has been chief curator since 1956. During his tenure in that post, the Gallery acquired more than nine hundred paintings.
Perhaps the most historic moment of the year was the announcement in October 1968 that the Center's theater would be named in honor of General and Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower. It was President Eisen- hower who initiated the Center in 1958.
During the past year the terms of six general trustees have expired: Mrs. Thomas W. Braden, Leonard H. Goldenson, Robert L Millonzi, Edwin Pauley, Arthur Penn, and Frank H. Ricketson, Jr.
Mr. Millonzi and Mr. Goldenson have been reappointed to ten-year terms. Also appointed to ten-year terms by President Johnson: Mrs. Rebekah Harkness, founder of the Harkness Ballet; Mrs. Michael J. Mansfield; Thomas Kuchel, former United States Senator from Cali- fornia; and Lew R. Wasserman, president of Music Corporation of America.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy has been appointed to fill the unexpired term of his late brother, Senator Robert F. Kennedy. Robert W. Dowling has been appointed to the term left vacant by the death of Howard F. Ahmanson, and Harry C. McPherson, Jr., has been ap- pointed to the term of Robert Lehman, who resigned because of ill health. Mr. Bowling's term expires in 1972 and Mr. McPherson's in 1976.
Mrs. Richard M. Nixon has accepted the Trustees' invitation to serve as Honorary Chairman of the Center together with Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, Mrs. Aristotle Onassis, and Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower.
In October 1968, it was announced that General and Mrs. Eisen- hower had accepted the trustees' wish that the Center's theater be known as the Eisenhower Theater. This dedication will serve to remind visitors of the General's extraordinary career and his role in the crea- tion of the Center.
The appointment of George London as Artistic Administrator was announced on 12 July 1968. Mr. London, internationally known opera and concert singer, assumed his position on 1 September 1968. His re- sponsibilities include the supervision of the programing, booking, and production of the musical activities of the Center.
Mr. London's distinguished musical career began with his profes- sional debut in 1941. He has performed with the San Francisco Opera, the Vienna State Opera, the Glyndeboume Opera, and the Metropolitan Opera, and has appeared at La Scala, the Bayreuth Festival, and the Bolshoi Theater. He is a member of the Board of Directors of New York City's Lincoln Center and President of the American Guild of Musical Artists.
Completion of the $100,000 endowment by the John Philip Sousa Memorial Fund was announced on 11 March 1969 at the American Bandmasters Association Convention. Funds for the project have been raised through donations from 692 high school and community bands, individuals, and commercial firms throughout the country and will be used to endow the stage in the Center's Concert Hall in Mr. Sousa's memory.
During the ceremony the oath of office was administered to four new trustees: Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Robert W. Dowling, Mrs. Rebekah Harkness, and Lew Wasserman.
The world premiere of MGM's The Shoes of the Fisherman at Washington's new L'Enfant Theatre on 14 November 1968 was a benefit for the Kennedy Center; it was organized by the Friends of the Kennedy Center under the chairmanship of Mrs. Neylan McBaine. Over $30,000 was added to the Center's construction fund by this event.
The Minneapolis Chamber of Commerce presented the first 12 of 100 Minnesota flowering crabapple trees to the Kennedy Center on 28 April 1969. During the brief presentation ceremony, Mr. Blair pro- dieted that the trees would become a serious rival to Washington's famous cherry trees.
America since 1966. Author of The Buried Life (1952) ; Thackeray: the Uses of Adversity (1955); Thackeray: the Age of Wisdom (1958), (with Leon Edel) Henry James and H. G. Wells (1958) . Editor of The Letters and Private Papers of William Makepeace Thackeray (4 volumes, 1945-1946) ; Thack- eray's Rose and the Ring, History of Henry Esmond, and Contributions to the "Morning Chronicle", and Wells' Desert Daisy and History of Mr. Polly.
NicoLAi CiKOvsKY, Jr. Studies in the art theories of the Hudson River School, with Dr. David W. Scott, National Collection of Fine Arts, from 1 Septem- ber 1968 to 30 June 1969.
Frederick Fried. Studies of architectural ornament in America from the mid nineteenth to the early twentieth century, with Dr. Richard H. Howland, National Museum of History and Technology, from 5 August 1968 to 31 July 1969.
LuDW^ELL H. Johnson, III. Studies of the influence of party politics and pressure groups on the conduct of the Civil War, including contraband trade, with Dr. PhiUp K. Lundeberg, National Museum of History and Technology, from I February to 30 June 1 969.
Thomas Parke Hughes. Study of the evolution of electric light and power systems, national and regional, in the United States, Germany, and Great Britain from 1880 to 1940, with Dr. Bernard S. Finn, National Museum of History and Technology, from 1 February to 31 August 1969.
Morris Rossabi. Studies of relations between China and Central Asia during the early Ming Dynasty, with Dr. John A. Pope, Freer Gallery of Art, from 1 July 1968 to 30 June 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from Columbia University.
Lorraine Elise Williams. Studies of contact between Indians and settlers in seventeenth-century New England, with Dr. Richard B. Woodbury, Na- tional Museum of Natural History, from 1 July 1968 to 31 March 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from New York University.
Robert Harold Getscher. Studies of Whistler's etchings, with Mrs. Adelyn Breeskin, National Collection of Fine Arts from 1 September 1968 to 31 Au- gust 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from Case Western Reserve University.
Harold K. Skramstad, Jr. Teaching activities in support of the Program in American Studies and investigation into the method, theory, and problems of material culture, v«th Dr. Wilcomb E. Washburn, National Museum of History and Technology, from 1 June 1968 to 31 May 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from the George Washington University.
Nancy M. Cramer. Studies of the systematics and biogeography of the poly- chaete family Spionidae, with Dr. Meredith Jones, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 July 1968 to 1 July 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from the George Washington University.
Mark H. Bernstein. Studies of response for "Quirks" in Cebus monkeys, with Dr. Martin H. Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 20 June 1968 to 31 July 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from the University of Pennsylvania.
Jeffrey B. Graham. Studies of the thermal relations of Panamanian fishes, with Dr. Ira Rubinoff, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 Au- gust 1968 to 31 August 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from Scripps Oceanographic Institute.
James R. Karr. A study of habitat and avian diversity in neotropics, with Dr. Neal G. Smith, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 July 1968 to 31 August 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from the Univer- sity of Illinois.
Charles Leck. Studies of the ecology of the avian exploitation of fruit trees, with Dr. Michael Robinson, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 23 September 1968 to 5 May 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from Cornell University.
NoRRis H. Williams. Studies of pollinator specificity in the genus Brassia (Orchidaceae), with Dr. Robert L. Dressier, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 September 1968 to 31 August 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from the University of Miami.
George H. Rieke. Studies of cosmic sources of gamma rays, with Dr. C. G. Fazio, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 September 1968 to 31 May 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from Harvard University.
William Patrick Roberts. Studies of the mineralogy of the Patuxent River Basin, with Dr. Jack W. Pierce, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 September 1968 to 15 August 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from the George Washington University.
Richard Wyatt Thomssen. Studies of composition of femic materials in southwestern porphyry copper deposits, with Dr. George Switzer, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 October 1968 to 30 June 1969, leading to the award of the PhD from the University of Arizona.
Janet Louise Stone. Study of methods of treating ethnographic materials under tropical conditions, with Dr. Robert Organ, Conservation Analytical Labora-
Marianne Lundig, University of Pennsylvania and National Museum in Copen- hagen. Study of methods of design and production, with Mr. John Anglim, Smithsonian OfRce of Exhibits.
Mary Thieme, National Humanities Endowment Museum Intern. Study of preservation methods applied to anthropological collections and the develop- ment of an exhibit on African textiles with Dr. Gordon Gibson, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 July 1968 to 31 May 1969.
Carol A. Cole, Cornell University. Content analysis of American political sym- bolism in the nineteenth century, with emphasis on material culture, with Dr. Wilcomb Washburn, National Museum of History and Technology.
Carol J. Heinsius, Mount Holyoke College. Preparation in all phases of the 1969 exhibit on presidential inaugurations, with Mrs. Margaret Klapthor, Na- tional Museum of History and Technology.
Ellen C. Schwartz, Brandeis University. Research in techniques of graphics and printing through the study of Smithsonian collections, with Dr. Elizabeth Harris, National Museum of History and Technology.
David Gentry Steele, University of Kansas. Estimation of stature from frag- mentary long bones, with Dr. T. Dale Stewart, National Museum of Natural History.
Catherine Wimsatt, University of Washington. Skeletal material from the Shannon site, Montgomery County, Virginia, with Dr. Lucile St. Hoyme, National Museum of Natural History.
Kenneth J. Hagan, Claremont Graduate School. "Response to Imperialism," American naval diplomacy in the semicivilized world, 1877-1889, with Dr. Philip Lundeberg, National Museum of History and Technology.
George T. Sharrer, Maryland University. Study of indigo production in South Carolina, 1776-1783, with Dr. John Schlebecker, National Museum of History and Technology.
Paul Fine, University of Pennsylvania. Study of the avian fauna of the Chesa- peake Bay Center for Field Biology, with Dr. Helmut Buechner, National Museum of Natural History.
Thomas Biffar, University of Miami. Studies of species of the genus Callian- assa in the collection of the National Museum of History and of the western Atlantic species of Callianassa (Crustacea: Decapoda), and a survey of thal- assinidian specimens in the collection of the National Museum of National History, with Dr. Raymond Manning, National Museum of Natural History.
Robert Dietz, Cornell University. A revision of the species included in the genus Horama (Ctenuchidae: Lepidoptera), with Dr. Donald Duckworth, National Museum of Natural History.
Jeremy B. C. Jackson, Yale University. Studies of spatial distribution and pop- ulation ecology of Mollusca of Carib Thalassa community, with Dr. Erie KauflF- man. National Museum of Natural History.
David Kirtley, Florida State University. Study of sabellariid wormreefs, with Dr. Marian Pettibone, National Museum of Natural History.
Mario Pichardo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute. Study of Pleistocene mam- malian remains from Puebla, Mexico, with Dr. Clayron Ray, National Mu- seum of Natural History.
William Smith-Vaniz, University of Miami. Studies of new genera and species of salarine blennies, with a key and synopsis of the genera (Blenniidae: Blen- niinae: Salariini), with Dr. Victor Springer, National Museum of Natural History.
Alv D. Youngberg, University of California. Studies of the willows of North America, with Dr. Mason Hale, National Museum of Natural History.
Jay M. Pasachoff, Harvard University. Analysis of data on the spectra of dy- namical features in the solar chromosphere, with Dr. Robert Noyes, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.
Michael Yost, Nova University. Study of user reactions to unscreened subject requests, with Mr. David Hershey, at the Science Information Exchange.
Richard S. Cowan Paul K. Knierim F. Raymond Fosberg Marie-Helene Sachet ^ Mrs. Mabel A. Byrd John J. Prenzel Joseph C. Britton
Ralph E. Crabill, Jr. William H. Anderson (Coleoptera) Mrs. Doris H. Blake (Coleoptera) Franklin S. Blanton (Diptera) Frank L. Campbell (Insect Physi- ology) K. C. Emerson (Mallophaga) Frank M. Hull (Diptera) William L. Jellison ( Siphonaptera,
Mrs. Dorothy Van Arsdale Frances P. Smyth Mrs. Eileen Rose Anne R. Gossett Mrs. Jane Kinzler Holly Teasdale
Carol H.Raney^" Mrs. Vija L. Karklins Charles H. King Mrs. Angeline D. Ashford Ruth E. Carlson Mrs. Martha L. Lang Margaret A. Sealor Mrs. Bertha S. Sohn
Secretary S. Dillon Ripley cuts an anniversary cake at a ceremony in the Smithsonian Castle on February 26, 1974, commemorating his decade of service as director of the Smithsonian Institution. Among others who joined in the celebration are former Secretary Alexander Wetmore, Mrs. Ripley (center), and Mrs. Reginald Bragonier.
The Institution's "increase," its research progress in history, the arts, and the sciences, is listed in Smithsonian Year 1974. Suffice it to say that both in astronomy and astrophysics, work under Director George Field is taking form in programs of great promise, particu- larly in regard to new observations of the Sun made during the flight of the Orbiting Space Laboratory in the past year. Additionally, suc- cessful research and construction proceeds in concert with the Uni- versity of Arizona on the multiple-mirror telescope. In the National Museum of Natural History a vigorous new array of exhibits is in the planning stage under the direction of Dr. Porter Kier. Temperate and tropical environmental studies are being vigorously pursued at our stations in the United States as well as in Panama.
In history our staff has collected the Institution's first Pulitzer prize in the person of Professor Daniel Boorstin and his third volume on The Americans: The Democratic Experience. All of us can take pride in the outstanding historicoliterate achievements of this fa- mous historian, who has resumed work as a Senior Historian after four busy years as Director of the National Museum of History and Technology. In this latter capacity he has been succeeded by another eminent historian. Professor Brooke Hindle, sometime Dean, Arts and Sciences, University College, at New York University, and head of that university's Department of History for many years. Mr. Hindle is particularly an historian of science, and his coming is a matter of great joy to all of us.
In this past year an additional West Coast branch of the Archives of American Art has been opened by our energetic director, WilHam Woolfenden, and the Presidency has been assumed by Dr. Irving Burton after three years of devoted work by Howard Lipman, who now becomes President of the Board of the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York. We are deeply grateful to all these able workers in the collation of the history of American art.
During the past year I have lost two of my friends. For the ten years of my tenure I have had the perfect conviction of longevity, se- cure in the belief that my three predecessors would be continually available as counsellors and reminders of the continuity of our hopes for the Institution. As I have noted in Smithsonian (November, 1973, and February, 1974), Dr. Wetmore and I have lost our two col- leagues. Dr. Leonard Carmichael, my predecessor as Secretary, on September 16, 1973, and Dr. Charles G. Abbot, his immediate prede- cessor as Secretary, on December 17, 1973. Together we had seemed a continuous chain, reaching back in time to when the Republic itself was less than a century old. They had helped and encouraged me to celebrate our own Smithson bicentennial in 1965, the 200th Anniver- sary of our Founder's birth, a noble occasion reminding us all of the academic and intellectual links of institutions like our own around the world. We mourn their passing and the loss of contact with the past which always helps to prepare us for the premonitions of the future.
The board of regents held three meetings in fiscal year 1974. The autumn meeting, convened on September 21, 1973, was designated The Leonard Carmichael Memorial Meeting in honor of Dr. Car- michael, the seventh Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. As an appropriate tribute to his memory, the Regents unanimously de- clared that the auditorium of the National Museum of History and Technology, constructed during his tenure, hereafter be known as the Leonard Carmichael Auditorium. A ceremony dedicating the Au- ditorium was held on January 21, 1974, presided over by the Chan- cellor, accompanied by music and with tributes from Dr. John Har- per, Rector of St. John's Church, Dr. Melvin Payne, President of the National Geographic Society, and the Secretary.
The new Chairman of the National Board of the Smithsonian As- sociates, Mr. Lewis A. Lapham succeeding Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr., was assured of enthusiastic support by the Regents, who en- dorsed the concept that the Institutional Development Committee of the National Board of the Smithsonian Associates undertake the Cooper-Hewitt capital fund raising as its first effort.
Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory from 1955 to 1973, retired in July, 1973, and is to con- tinue his work as Senior Research Scientist. The Regents voted to award him the Henry Medal in recognition of his important contri- butions to the Institution.
Mr. Gordon N. Ray, Chairman of the Smithsonian Council, who was present, briefly reviewed the activities of the Council since its inception, citing its membership, its considerations, and conclusions. The Board of Regents thanked Mr. Ray for his efforts and conveyed appreciation to the Council members for their interest and work in behalf of the Institution.
The death of Mrs. Marjorie Merriweather Post, a great benefactor of the Smithsonian Institution, occurred on September 12, 1973. A
Smithsonian Committee was organized to work with the representa- tives of Mrs. Post's estate and foundation to facilitate an orderly transfer of the property and collections bequeathed to the Smith- sonian.
The January 25, 1974, meeting of the Board of Regents was desig- nated The Charles Greeley Abbot Memorial Meeting in tribute to the Smithsonian Institution's fifth Secretary, whose death occurred in December at the age of 101. Appropriately, the Radiation Biology Laboratory will bear Dr. Abbot's name henceforward, since this as- pect of the Institution's research owes its genesis, in 1929, to Dr. Abbot.
Originally established entirely with funds from Mr. Smithson's be- quest, the Institution has, over a long period of years, derived an in- creasing proportion of its support from federal appropriations as it was entrusted with more national collections and expanded its re- search and public exhibitions.
In September 1973, at the death of Mrs. Marjorie Merriweather Post, the responsibility for her "Hillwood" estate and the extraordi- nary collections it contains passed to the Smithsonian. A trust fund
Foundation Dr. and Mrs. Herbert E. Hawkes Charles Hayden Foundation William Randolph Hearst Foundation Mr. and Mrs. Henry J. Heinz II Mrs. Ethel R. Holmes Houston Endowment, Inc.
Associates, Inc. J. M. Kaplan Fund, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. Daniel E. Koshland Mr. Edwin A. Link Andrew W. Mellon Foundation Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer
Foundation The Mobil Foundation, Inc. The Ambrose Monell Foundation National Geographic Society New York State Council on the Arts Edward John Noble Foundation Phillip Morris Incorporated Janet Neff Charitable Trust Estate of Marjorie Merriweather Post Rockefeller Brothers Fund Estate of Gertrude Sampson Mississippi State Historical Museum Miss Alice Tully
Foundation Mrs. Frances K. Clark The Coca Cola Company Committee for Islamic Culture Continental Oil Company Mr. and Mrs. Raymond E. Cox Mrs. Alice Crowley Trust Cultural Council Foundation Ms. Priscilla Cunningham Ms. Aileen Curry-Cloonan Dana Corporation Foundation Mrs. John Dimick
Cleveland H. Dodge Foundation, Inc. Earhart Foundation The Edipa Foundation, Inc. El Paso Natural Gas Company Dr. William L. Elkins Elsa Wild Animal Appeal Mr. Alfred U. Elser, Jr. Entomological Society of America The Eppley Foundation for Research Mrs. Ruth M. Epstein Fieldcrest Mills, Inc. First National Bank of Miami General Electric Company General Telephone & Electronics
Foundation Mrs. Rebecca D. Gibson Mr. Alfred C. Glassell, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Joshua A. Gollin Mrs. Katherine Graham Great Lakes Aircraft Co. Mr. Felix Guggenheim
Telegraph Corporation The Island Foundation Janss Foundation The Johnson Foundation, Inc. J. D. R. 3rd Fund, Inc. Mr. James Ellwood Jones, Jr. Mrs. Merri Jones Mrs. Ruth Cole Kainen Atwater Kent Foundation, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. Judd Kessler Keystone Shipping Co. Kidder Peabody Foundation Mr. Irving B. Kingsford Dr. and Mrs. Robert Kinnaird Kominers, Fort, Schlefer & Boyer Mr. Edward F. Kook Mr. David Lloyd Kreeger S. S. Kresge Company Mr. and Mrs. Rodney M. Layton Lilly Endowment, Inc. Mr. Charles A. Lindbergh Mr. Harold F. Linder The Link Foundation Mrs. Elizabeth Lorentz The Lykes Foundation, Inc. Maritime Overseas Corporation Mr. and Mrs. William A. Marsteller Townsend B. Martin Charitable
Foundation Mr. and Mrs. John Mayer McDonald's Corporation Mr. Forrest L. Merrill Mobil Foundation, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. Harry C. Nail, Jr. National Bank of Detroit National Council on Productivity
Company Northrop Corporation Northwest Industries Foundation, Inc. Olin Corporation Charitable Trust Ourisman Foundation, Inc. Palisades Foundation, Inc. Mr. Perry R. Pease J. C. Penney Company, Inc. The Pioneer Foundation Mr. and Mrs. Feodor U. Pitcairn Polaroid Foundation, Inc. Dr. and Mrs. John A. Pope Propeller Club of U.S., Port of
New York R. J. Reynolds Industries, Inc. Miss Esther M. Ridder Mr. and Mrs. Ralph C. Rinzler Dr. 5. Dillon Ripley Mr. and Mrs. William G. Roe Schubert Foundation Miss Elsie Shaver Shipbuilders Council of America Sidney Printing and Publishing Co.
Foreign Affairs The IX Foundation S. C. Johnson and Son, Inc. Mr. E. P. Jones Josten Fund, Inc. Mr. James G. Kenan Mr. and Mrs. Fleming Law James A. MacDonald Foundation The Magnavox Foundation Mrs. Margaret McClellan Ellen McCluskey Associates
Mr. Carl H. Pforzheimer, Jr. Mr. John Shedd Reed Dr. Ira Rubinoff Santa Fe Industries, Inc. The Norine and Ottilie
Schillig Foundation, Inc. Mr. Sidney N. Shure Shuttleworth Carton Co. Mr. Robert H. Smith E. R. Squibb and Sons, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. Irwin R. Stone Levi Strauss Foundation Strayer College Mr. and Mrs. John L. Tishman Mr. Chi-Chuan Wang Mr. and Mrs. Harold I. Westcott Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc.
The Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (stri) underwent a change of directorship this past year with the return of Dr. Martin Moynihan to his research as Senior Scientist at stri. He was suc- ceeded by Dr. Ira Rubinoff, who previously served as Assistant Director at the facility. The research undertaken at stri continued to be primarily concerned with basic scientific questions of the evo- lutionary and ecological adaptations of tropical organisms. An in- creased education program was undertaken with grants received from the Henry L. and Grace Doherty and Edward John Noble foundations.
The Research Institute on Immigration and Ethnic Studies, under the direction of Dr. Roy Bryce-Laporte, has been supervising re- search in Costa Rica and Panama. In particular, it has focused on the West Indian adaptation and experience in both of these countries. It has also been reviewing policy implications of migration and some contemporary perspectives on alienation.
The Center's full-time staff numbered approximately 40 at the close of the fiscal year. Among the additions were Dr. Barbara Rice, Research Speciahst with the' Remote Sensing Project; Dr. Maria Faust, Biologist; Dr. Tung Lin Wu, Chemist; Dr. John Falk, Educa-
The new multidisciplinary thematic exhibits that are in the process of design and production are the result of an entirely new approach to exhibits at the Museum. An advisory committee of Museum scien- tists, headed by Dr. Leo J. Hickey, has been set up as a liaison between the Museum's professional staff and its exhibits office, directed by Harry T. Hart. A close working relationship has been established that is responsible for the excellence of the new Ice Age Hall and the promise of the Museum's Bicentennial exhibit, "Our Changing Land."
Dr. Porter Kier (left). Director of the National Museum of Natural History, presents an award to David J. Hasinger for making significant additions to the scientific collections of the Museum. Mr. Hasinger is Director of Paul and Beckman, Inc., Philadelphia electronics manufacturer.
Two other colorful and notable exhibits in the Museum's foyer area were the offshoot of the field research trips of two of the Museum's scientists. One was a display of large, dye-transfer color prints of tropical blossoms photographed in Africa and South Amer- ica by Dr. Edward S. Ayensu, Chairman of the Museum's Depart- ment of Botany (supplemented with pictures by the Museum's scientific photographer, Kjell B. Sandved), the other placed on view ethnological materials from the eastern Himalayan country of Bhu- tan, collected by Dr. Eugene I. Knez, the Museum's Curator of Asian Anthropology. This exhibit was planned to coincide with the June coronation of Bhutan's 19-year-old king, and included the display of photographs, paintings, textiles, costumes, copper, gold and silver vessels, religious objects, basketry, and pottery. Among
Dr. Angel's work over the last decade has been concentrated on Eastern Mediterranean burial sites such as Catal Hiiyiik, Turkey, where a population of early neolithic hunting farmers and traders, living in a compact pueblo-like community, had conquered the peril of a high child mortality rate — probably caused by malaria — by evolving a culture that venerated and protected women. This had lengthened the lives and childbearing years of the women. The population of the community had increased as a result, and it had become possible for the women to make a rich contribution to the community's art, crafts, and religious activities, while the men were hunting and trading.
The People of Lerna: An Analysis of a Prehistoric Aegean Popu- lation, published by the Smithsonian Institution Press, is Dr. Angel's study of a site situated on the Bay of Argos, Greece, where archeolo- gists found 235 Bronze Age graves, covering a span of 25 generations (2000-1600 B.C.).
The demographic profile Dr. Angel constructed showed that adults in Lerna (which he estimated had about 800 persons living in it during the Middle Bronze Age) had an average life expectancy of 34 years — 37 for men, 31 for women. The average woman bore about five children — 2.2 of which grew to adulthood (15 years of age). On the basis of that birth rate the population was increasing, doubling every 7 to 10 generations. This was a remarkably successful adaptation to the handicapping diseases afflicting the community.
Dr. Angel's colleague, Douglas Ubelaker, has been analyzing skeletal material from a large pre-Columbian cemetery in the Hacienda Ayalan, Guayas Province, on the south coast of Ecuador, dating to a.d. 1300, where 50 large ceramic urns, each containing up to 20 skeletons, were uncovered.
Dr. Thomas R. Soderstrom, Curator of Grasses, Department of Botany, examining specimens of flowering bamboo.
The covered jars in Dr. Donald R. Davis's laboratory are full of blotched and discolored leaves on which one can see curious lines. Some of the lines are crooked, some are coiled in a serpentine man- ner, and others strike out in every direction from a central patch, creating a star-shaped pattern. The leaves were collected by Dr. Davis from the Great Dismal Swamp in Virginia, but they could just as well be from almost any garden, park, or forest in America, The marks on the leaves are the work of leaf miners, insect larvae of minute size that can infest every leaf of a plant or tree and do enough aggregate damage to kill their host. In Canada, the miners have been so destructive to spruce and fir trees in the Western Provinces in the last few years that the Government has initiated a biological study of these insects in hopes of finding a means of control.
Last year. Dr. Davis, Curator at the Museum's Department of Entomology, began work on a biosystematic study directed specifically at four important families of leaf-mining Microlepidop- tera (Eriocraniidae, Nepticulidae, Heliozelidae, and Gracillariidea).
Dr. Donald R. Davis, Curator of Lepidoptera, Department of Entomology, examining leaves with tell-tale markings left by leaf miners.
One of the things Dr. Davis wants to do through his study of these families is to trace the evolutionary history of mining. Re- cently, Dr. Leo J. Hickey, a Museum paleobotanist, found a Nepticu- lid leaf mine on a lower Cretaceous Angiosperm leaf, a discovery that extends this basic ecological association between plants and insects back nearly 110 million years. Dr. Davis is now examining the Smithsonian-U.S. Geological Survey collection of Cretaceous and early Tertiary Angiosperms for further evidence of early Lepi- doptera leaf-mining injury.
The mined leaves that Dr. Davis collects on trips to habitats like the Great Dismal Swamp and the Great Smoky Mountains are brought back to his Museum laboratory so that the miner larvae can be reared, identified, and closely observed. Dr. Davis plans studies of all phases of their life cycle, including oviposition, larval development, mine morphology, pupation, and adult behavior. He is also interested in correlating the systematics and behavior of the moths with that of their plant hosts. Why does a particular species of miner often only feed on a particular species of plant?
But before such intriguing biological questions can be seriously studied, basic taxonomic revisions must be prepared. Much of the classification of the four families was done in the nineteenth century, an age when moth investigators described the color and venation of wings — but little else. The skeleton, which is now recognized as the best part of the insect on which to base a taxonomic diagnosis, was often ignored. Dr. Davis has had to start out by eliminating the confusion this has created. He is now assembling comprehensive illustrated texts to facilitate rapid, accurate identification for the approximately 365 presently recognized North American species and the more than 100 new species that have come to light in his studies.
What will happen if the sea-level canal the U.S. Government has proposed constructing sometime in the future across the Isthmus of Panama mixes the animal and plant groups of the Atlantic and Pacific sides? Scientists say that serious ecological disruptions could follow. Dr. Meredith L. Jones, Curator of Worms in the Museum's Department of Invertebrate Zoology, saw several years ago that the lack of fundamental knowledge about the communities of marine
The original qualitative collecting method involved hand-picking the organisms from the surface of a sieve that had been used to process an undetermined amount of sediment. Dr. Jones and his colleagues devised a quantitative method that they are now using to get true samples of the density and diversity of invertebrate organisms living in Panama's coastal waters. Collections are made while the tide is still high. Standing in water that is anywhere from ankle to waist deep, the scientists drive a cubical stainless steel jacket, that has an area of 1/20 of a square meter, 8 inches down into the mud. Then they slide a shovel under the jacket, draw it out of the bottom, sieve the sample, and bottle all of the residue. In typical samples taken the new way, the yields comprised an average of about 1800 specimens per square meter on a clean sand beach on the Atlantic coast, about 6400 specimens per square meter on a muddy sand beach on the Pacific, and about 46,000 specimens per square meter in an Atlantic turtle-grass bed.
At the Museum, a technician-student has been making quantita- tive counts of invertebrate life forms in each sample, classifying the animals by families. There is such an abundance of life in each sample that processing it takes the technician six full days of work. When Dr. Jones examines the worms in a sample to identify them at a species level, six more days of work are involved. He estimates that it will take him three to four years to get through all of the samples that have been collected.
If a sea-level canal should be constructed. Dr. Jones is satisfied that now scientists will be able to go back to the same site, make new collections, and then make comparisons that will show them what is happening, and enable them to predict what will happen next and if it will be beneficial or harmful. If the sea-level canal is never constructed. Dr. Jones believes the Program is still well worthwhile.
The present Panama Canal with freshwater lakes situated mid- way along its length has proved a highly effective barrier to the passage of marine life from one side of Central America to the other. So a scientist's curiosity is aroused when a marine fish native to the Pacific shows up in the Caribbean. Dr. Victor G. Springer, Curator of Fishes in the Museum's Department of Vertebrate Zoology, re- cently looked into the matter of a tropical Indo-West Pacific blenniid fish population living off Trinidad and the Atlantic entrance to the Canal. Was it a relic population that was once distributed through- out the world's tropic waters or had it been artificially introduced, conceivably through the Canal?
The facts argued against its being a relic population. Members of the blenniid family speciate rapidly and no blenniid species is found in both the eastern Pacific and western Atlantic Oceans, which were last connected 2 to 4 million years ago. If the fish had once been widely distributed in the tropics, its Indo-West Pacific and Caribbean populations would have evolved into different species since the rise of the isthmus. Dr. Springer concluded that it must have been arti- ficially introduced into the western Atlantic, probably by the dis- charge of ballast or bilge waters of ships. The fish is small and found in abundance around docks where it can easily be sucked into a ship's ballast tanks. Other small marine fish have been picked up in this way, taken thousands of miles, released when the ship discharged its bilge waters, and established breeding populations. But this is the only instance of a fish being introduced in this way into the Caribbean.
Did the ships that brought the fish to the Caribbean enter through the Canal? Dr. Springer thinks not. Ships coming across the Pacific discharge their bilge-ballast water before they enter the Canal; that being the case, the fish should be established on the Pacific side of the Canal. But it has never been found there or anywhere else in the eastern Pacific, but it does occur at the Atlantic entrance to the Canal. Trinidad is where the fish has its principal Caribbean popula- tion and where it was first collected in the Atlantic in 1930. Dr. Springer believes that instead of coming across the Pacific, the fish arrived in Trinidad from the Indo-West Pacific via the Atlantic before the Canal was first opened in 1914.
Dr. Meredith L. Jones, Curator of Worms in the Department of Invertebrate Zoology, examining specimens in a sieve.
Omobranchus punctatus, subject of study by Dr. Victor G. Springer, Curator of Fishes in the Department of Vertebrate Zoology.
The trail led Dr. Springer to the East Indian coolie trade that flour- ished between Calcutta and Madras, on the east coast of India, and the West Indies islands in the years from 1838 to 1914 and 1917. In that period, thousands of coolies arrived on ships that traveled from India to the Caribbean around southern Africa. It is Dr. Springer's view that the coolie trade vessels were the vehicles that introduced Omobranchus punctatus into the western Atlantic.
Garnet can be yellow, orange, red, lilac or purple, depending on its chemical composition and upon the temperature and pressure conditions under which it formed in the earth. It has long been known by scientists that this colorful mineral occurs in varying quantities in kimberlite pipes, the bodies of igneous rock that are the primary source of diamonds. But the fact that there was a high or low concentration of garnet in a pipe did not seem to indicate one way or the other if there was an abundance or dearth of diamonds present. Last year, however. Dr. George S. Switzer, Curator of Min- eralogy in the Museum's Department of Mineral Science, discovered that certain lilac-colored garnets have special compositional charac- teristics that make it possible to say that if they are present in a pipe, it is a diagnostic indication that diamonds are likely to be found there in economic quantities.
These two opposing views were tested by Dr. Switzer in a detailed study of the garnet in the Finsch kimberlite pipe, one of the richest diamond mines in South Africa. Finsch is also rich in garnet. It makes up 90 percent of the mineral concentrate recovered there dur- ing the diamond extraction process.
The results showed that some of the grains of lilac-colored gar- nets — magnesum rich and calcium poor — had a chromium con- tent that placed them within the compositional field of the garnets previously only reported as inclusions in diamonds. Dr. Switzer, who is now testing garnets from other kimberlite pipes, believes that the presence of lilac-colored diamond of this special composition is diag- nostic of the presence of diamond in a pipe, but it is not known yet if there is any quantitative relationship.
Dr. Daniel J. Stanley, Geological Oceanographer and Curator in the Museum's Department of Paleobiology, is helping piece together a detailed knowledge of the physical processes that shape the Medi- terranean region, a project that often finds him out on an oceano- graphic vessel taking sediment cores from the Mediterranean Sea bed. The recent development of deep-sea drilling technology as well as submersibles — deep-sea* cameras, underwater television, and very high resolution seismic profilers — have made it possible for
This emerging picture of geologic change includes Dr. Stanley's discovery of sedimentological evidence for the existence of a large emerged land mass present in the area now occupied by the Ligurian Sea (between the Riviera and Corsica, in the western Mediterranean) until early Tertiary time. Seismic studies of the present Ligurian Sea floor, and examination of exposed sediments found in the French Maritime Alps, Corsica, and the northwestern Apennines of Italy, confirm that this land mass foundered and became submerged after the Oligocene.
Finding specimens of exposed ancient sedimentary deposits — now uplifted to 10,000 feet above sea level in the mountain chains that surround the Mediterranean — is one part of Dr. Stanley's i work that does not require advanced technology. For this. Dr. Stan- ley depends upon his keen geologist's eye and his skill as a mountain climber.
The publication in 1973 of the 765-page bilingual volume The Mediterranean Sea: A Natural Sedimentation Laboratory, edited by Dr. Stanley and Drs. Gilbert Kelling and Yehezkiel Weiler, was the result of Dr. Stanley's determination to achieve a needed multi- disciplinary and multinational synthesis of current research in sedi- mentation and related fields in the Mediterranean and circum- Mediterranean. The book has contributions by 85 specialists from 15 countries, all of whom participated in a symposium organized by Dr. Stanley in 1971 at the VIII International Sedimentological Con- gress in Heidelberg.
Despite the move of the white tigers (Mohini and Rewati) to Chi- cago's Brookfield Zoo and the white-gene carrying Ramana and Kesari to the Cincinnati Zoo to allow replacement of the old Lion House, the latter pair added a new chapter to the breeding program by producing four cubs, three of which are white. A normal-colored ^i male, along with a white male were taken from the mother for hand- rearing and are doing well under the expert care of the Cincinnati staff, and the same can be said for the two, unsexed animals who remain with their mother, Kesari. Unfortunately, the sire Ramana passed away the week before with a chronic kidney condition, which is so often seen in the big cats between 10 or 12 years of age. These four new cubs give great hope for continuing the line of white tigers and should be a stellar attraction when the "Dr. William M. Mann Lion and Tiger Exhibit" is completed, hopefully in early 1976.
While it is pleasant to report on significant births, note must also be taken of deaths, and four famous old-timers at the Zoo have passed on. Pokodiak, a female hybrid bear (Alaskan Brown X Polar Bear), born in 1936, died in April at the age of 38 years. She is the last of the National Zoological Park's famous hybrid bears which had such an eminently popular appeal due to their great size and unusual family background. Biggy, the 14-foot saltwater crocodile, one of the largest crocodilians in captivity, died this March after 42 years on exhibition. He was a spectacular animal and well beloved by his visitors. The Silver-crested Cockatoo, Richard, originally known as Jacob, died in February. This bird was brought back from Sumatra as a mature bird by Dr. Mann with the 1937 National Geographic/Smithsonian Institution Expedition. He had been for many years in the home of a Dutch plantation owner and spoke a smattering of Dutch and Indonesian. He was a great delight to the visitors, being an excellent talker. He soon learned English, and one of his favorite phrases, "open the door, Richard," gradually brought about his change in name by which in later years he was known. This bird was thoroughly imprinted on human beings and would have nothing to do with his feathered kin, preferring the company of humans; for this reason since 1965 he was exhibited in the Ele- phant House to the delight of thousands of children if not to the delight of the hippopotamuses, his nearest neighbors. His maniacal laughter, joyous whistling, and general rowdiness will be missed. He has been replaced by an Amazon parrot, who was given to the Zoo as a pet similarly imprinted.
The Office of Zoological Research, under Dr. John Eisenberg, achieved notable progress on 24 projects in field mammalian ecology, reproduction, behavioral analysis, and nutritional analysis. As one arbitrary measure of success, 28 original contributions were pub- lished in the department's six years of history to 1972, and 43 titles, with 9 more now in press, since then. Nine graduate students and two postdoctoral students from six universities were guided and supported in 1974.
Field efforts in the neotropics by Dr. G. C. Montgomery illumi- nated the importance of the significant biomass contributions of the three-toed sloth and of the lesser anteater, as well as to improving chances for their eventual captive acclimatization. Other studies inte- grated with the National Museum of Natural History and the Smith- sonian Tropical Research Institute advanced with respect to a host of rodent and primate species.
Methods for scoring the behavior of female mammals as they pass through estrus were developed by Dr. Devra Kleiman. Behavioral changes associated with estrus in the tigress were published for the first time. The role of olfaction as a mediator of reproductive behav- ior in the binturong was published. The propagation of the golden marmoset in the second generation was accomplished by Dr. Klei- man and associated staff. The analysis of reproductive behavior of the lesser panda and factors contributing to reproductive success in
Recognizing the importance of olfaction and the role of olfactory signals in the priming and triggering of sexual behavior, several rodent species have been explored by Dr. Michael Murphy, includ- ing wild stocks of the golden hamster and three genera of cavio- morph rodents.
Dr. Eisenberg and his associates were deeply involved guiding the success of the Thirteenth International Congress of Ethology held in August with George Washington University and the Smith- sonian Institution being the co-hosts. Scientists from many differ- ent nations attended, resulting in an exciting exchange of stimulating scientific information.
This year marked a change in the administration of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. Dr. Martin H. Moynihan, in order to devote his full time to research, resigned to become a senior scientist at the Institute after directing this bureau for 16 years. During this period he guided stri's growth from a biological preserve and small field camp on Barro Colorado Island to a research institute with a worldwide reputation. During Dr. Moynihan's tenure the permanent professional staff increased from 1 to 15, and the geographic scope of their investigations extended from Barro Colorado Island and the surrounding forests to adjacent areas of Central and South America, and then to intertropical comparisons in Gabon, Ceylon, India, Madagascar, Malaya, and New Guinea. Moynihan supported a program of student fellowship at both the pre- and post-doctoral level and encouraged a steadily increasing number of scientific visitors from around the world.
The research of the institute's staff closely reflects the depth and diversity of Dr. Moynihan's own scientific interests, which in the last 15 years have ranged from the behavior, evolution, and ecology of such diverse groups as birds, primates, and cephalopods. Research on the latter group was facilitated by the development of a marine research program and stri marine laboratories on both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of Panama.
Mr. Joseph H. Hirshhorn, who gave his great collections of sculpture and paintings to the Nation, receives the James Smithson Society Medallion from Secretary Ripley.
This was also the year in which the Museum of History and Tech- nology gained a new director, and the Institution shared in the re- flected glory of its first PuHtzer Prize. The prize winner was Daniel Boorstin, for The Democratic Experience, the concluding volume of his trilogy The Americans. Upon becoming a Senior Historian, Dr. Boorstin was succeeded in the directorship of the Museum of History and Technology by Dr. Brooke Hindle, a distinguished historian of early American science and technology. An outstanding scholar who has long been associated with museums, and whose university ex- perience includes service as a departmental chairman and a dean. Dr.
Three particularly interesting smaller groups of papers are a long series of letters from Alfred Stieglitz to Arthur Dove, written in the 1920s and 1930s; 15 Maurice Prendergast letters to a friend and collector, Mrs. Oliver Williams, and a diary kept by the New York dealer WilUam Macbeth in the 1870s and 1880s.
Mrs. Alfred Negley, Vice President Mrs. Dana M. Raymond Mrs. E. Bliss Parkinson, Vice President Mrs. William L. Richards
The William H. Goodyear collection of architectural photographs was transferred to the Cooper-Hewitt Library from the National Museum of History and Technology. John Maximus gave another portion (1919 items) of his classified pictorial reference library. The Color and Light Archive was enlarged with a gift of 1293 items on color by Mrs. L H. Godlove.
New York Waterfront, 1926-1940, a hanging by Lydia Bush-Brown (Mrs. Francis Head), who recently presented it to the Cooper-Hewitt Museum of Decorative Arts and Design.
An American cast-iron, mid-nineteenth century mantel with Eglomise panels, one of a pair. Its height including shelf is SeVi inches; its height to the top of the arch is 36 inches; width of the arch is 35 inches, and length of the shelf is 71 inches. This mantel was given to the Cooper-Hewitt Museum of Decorative Arts and Design by Mrs. Whitney Atwood.
Three members of the curatorial staff, Elaine Evans Dee, Milton Sonday, and Catherine Lynn Frangiamore, received foundation grants for research outside of the Museum. Mrs. Frangiamore's book on wallpapers used in America will be published by Praeger next spring. The staff was enlarged by two: Dorothy Twining Globus, who joined the Museum's permanent exhibition staff, and Arete Swartz, from the Victoria and Albert Museum, who worked in the education department on a one-year grant. Twenty scholars studied the collections, and 7 student interns received training. Special lec- tures were given for visiting classes from New York University, City University of New York, the Art Students League, Pratt Institute, and Yale University.
The Museum held an extremely successful benefit auction under the chairmanship of Mrs. H. J. Heinz II. All of the items were do- nated expressly for the sale by collectors, dealers, and other friends of the Museum. A total of $125,000 was raised for the building fund. Grants were received from the Charles Hayden Foundation, Janet Neff Charitable Trust, Maya Corporation, Elsie de Wolfe Founda- tion, and New York Community Trust, and an additional $72,000 was raised, largely from corporations and individual designers for a Study Center in memory of Doris and Henry Dreyfuss.
Empress Farah of Iran is shown a part of the Freer Gallery of Art's Persian collection by Dr. Harold P. Stern, Director, and Dr. Esin Atil (right). Curator of Near Eastern Art. Looking on is Karim Pasha Bahadori of the Empress' staff.
Mr. Laurence Sickman; and on January 16, 1974, the award was given to the renowned Near Eastern scholar. Professor Roman Ghirshman. The three men were honored as recipients of the Freer Medal for their "distinguished contribution to the knowledge and understanding of Oriental civilizations as reflected in their arts."
In the course of fiscal 1974, the Collection has expanded by the accession of 36 objects. Of those, several fine items were acquired by gift from the estates of Mrs. Agnes E. Meyer and Mr. Myron Bement Smith. Other objects of importance were presented by Mrs. Anna Chennault and Mr. Yoichi Nakajima.
Rutherford J. Gettens joined the staff of the Freer Gallery of Art on October 1, 1951.During the more than 20 years of his association with the Gallery, he was instrumental in establishing the Technical Laboratory and in maintaining its high level of research. His publi- cations on problems relating to pigment analysis and on the fabrica- tion of Chinese bronze vessels achieved an international reputation for him and the Laboratory. After his retirement in 1968, Mr. Get- tens remained active in the position of Research Consultant. His unexpected death on June 17, 1974, at the age of 74, is an irreplace- able loss.
On April 17, 1974, title to the extensive collections included in the Agreement of May 17, 1966, passed from Mr. Joseph H. Hirsh- horn to the Smithsonian Institution. This action was immediately followed by implementation of previously established plans for moving the Collection.
During this period the staff paused to mourn the passing of two dedicated individuals who contributed greatly to the planning and development of the Museum's programs: On March 2, 1974, the staff was saddened to hear of the death of Miss Elisabeth Houghton, a member of the Museum's Board of Trustees and a lifelong cham- pion of civic causes. She was one of the original members of the Board, having been appointed by President Nixon in 1971. On Sep- tember 6, 1973, the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden lost the invaluable collaboration of Mr. Douglas MacAgy, who super- vised the preliminary design of our inaugural exhibition. Mr. Mac- Agy 's contribution was outstanding and his previous experience with the National Endowment for the Arts was of great help in our initial planning.
The Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden has been most suc- cessful in recruiting qualified and outstanding personnel in the pro- fessional field to fill new positions, and to replace those who have left our ranks: The Board of Trustees, at their April 4, 1974, meeting, voted to appoint Miss Anne d'Harnoncourt to the Board for a term expiring in 1980. At this meeting the Honorable Daniel P. Moynihan was reelected Chairman, and Dr. George Heard Hamilton was re- elected Vice Chairman.
David Lloyd Kreeger Abram Lerner, ex officio Henry P. Mcllhenny Ogden M. Pleissner Harold Rosenberg Charles H. Sawyer Mrs. Otto L. Spaeth Otto Wittman
On the first of October 1973, Dr. Daniel J. Boorstin moved from the directorship of the Museum to the post of Senior Historian in the National Museum of History and Technology, a position which allows him to devote more of his energies to research and writing. In May 1974, Dr. Boorstin received the Pulitzer Prize for History for The Americans: The Democratic Experience, the final volume in his trilogy on the American people. The writing of this volume had been completed during the four years of his directorship.
Dr. Boorstin's successor. Professor Brooke Hindle, was appointed after nomination by museum curators and began his tenure in Feb- ruary. A faculty member of the New York University since 1950, his two most recent posts have been as Dean of the University College of Arts and Science and Head of the University Department of History. Known for his distinctive works. The Pursuit of Science in Revolutionary America 1735-1785; David Rittenhouse: A Biog- raphy; and Technology in America: Needs and Opportunities, Dr. Hindle is presently editing a volume which summarizes the confer- ence he planned for Sleepy Hollow Restorations on "America's Wooden Age." His present research assesses the role of industrial fairs in advancing the technology of their time. His particular focus has been the Centennial Exposition of 1876 — from which the
Mrs. Nancy Kissinger (center) on a recent visit to the National Museum of History and Technology with the wives of the foreign ministers from Latin America is shown a collection of yellow-glazed English Earthenware by Paul V. Gardner, Curator, Division of Ceramics and Glass.
This year the Dwight D. Eisenhower Institute for Historical Research, a study and conference center which will make important contributions to national study and evaluation of the Armed Forces, their importance in war and in maintaining peace, was brought to full realization with the appointment of Dr. Forrest C. Pogue, Direc-
The Division of Numismatics was joint host, with the American Numismatic Society, of the 1973 International Numismatic Con- gress which met for the first time in the United States in September 1973, Opening in New York City, the Congress moved to Washing- ton, where numerous papers were presented in the Museum to an attendance of 329 numismatists and guests representing 32 coun- tries. A special exhibition of medals commemorating the battles of the American Revolution was produced by the Division with an interpretative publication. A derivative of the Congress was a three- volume Survey of Numismatic Research, of which Mrs. Elvira Clain- Stefanelli was the editor of the section on medals.
On May 30, the Secretary presented to Dr. Vladimir Clain- Stefanelli and to Mrs. Elvira Clain-Stefanelli the Exceptional Service Gold Medal Award "in recognition of the successful acquisition and display of the Josiah K. Lilly Collection of gold coins and their many other achievements and accomplishments in the numismatic world and for their tireless devotion to the development of one of the
The year began with the opening on the Fourth of July of a major exhibition entitled "The Black Presence in the Era of the American Revolution, 1770-1800," which consisted of more than 250 items: paintings, prints, broadsides and books, documents and letters, and three-dimensional objects. Professor Sidney Kaplan of the University of Massachusetts prepared both the exhibition and its catalogue, a 270-page volume containing 100 black and white illustrations and 8 in color, published for the National Portrait Gallery (npg) by the New York Graphic Society in association with the Smithsonian Institution Press. Professor Kaplan, who took a year's leave of absence from his post at Amherst College to come to Washington, was the first of many scholars, experts in their fields, whom we hope to call upon in connection with special exhibitions and publications. "The Black Presence," like all the Gallery's major exhibitions, also was accompanied by an illustrated booklet and a teacher's guide, prepared especially for the secondary-school level. This publication, 72 pages in length and illustrated with 50 reproductions, was written by the Associate Curator of Education, Mrs. Lisa W. Strick.
Bust of President Lyndon B. Johnson by Jimilu Mason. Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson and Senator Hubert Humphrey spoke at the presentation ceremony.
Seeking other ways to encourage the interchange of ideas and the exchange of information. Academic Studies supports visitors to the Institution for very brief periods of study, research, and consultation with the staff. The range of purposes and levels of accomplishment of these visitors reflect the diversity of the Smith- sonian itself, for they may be graduate students or distinguished senior scholars and scientists, from the United States or abroad, and their interests lead them to all areas of the Smithsonian. They come here for their individual purposes, as short-term visitors, or as participants in specialized seminars. This year support was pro- vided for 32 short-term visitors, and for one seminar, conducted by Dr. William Fitzhugh of the Smithsonian's Department of Anthropology, on the topic of the Maritime and Moorehead Archaic cultures of northeastern North America.
The course in "Material Aspects of American Civilization" was taught by Dr. Washburn (with the assistance of curators and others inside and outside the Smithsonian). A seminar in Museum Visitor Behavior was conducted by Robert A. Lakota and the staff of the Psychological and Sociological Studies Program of the Office of Museum Programs. A seminar in the decorative arts was conducted by Patrick Butler III, Honorary Smithsonian Research Associate. Arthur C. Townsend, Executive Secretary, Maryland Historical Trust and Honorary Smithsonian Research Associate, repeated his seminar in Great Plains history. A Work-Study Program in His- torical Archeology, offered by the St. Mary's City Commission in cooperation with the American Studies Program of the Smith- sonian, George Washington University, and St. Mary's College of Maryland, was held from June 17 to August 23, 1974, with participation by graduate students and Smithsonian staff members. In addition to these formal seminars, supervision of individual reading and research projects, thesis direction, and preparation of comprehensive examinations were undertaken by the director and cooperating Smithsonian staff members.
The study of the museum as a learning environment, referred to above, has led to staff participation in several seminars, and a series of short articles were published in Museum News. A major monograph by Dr. Chandler Screven, The Measurement and Facili- tation of Learning in the Museum Environment: An Experimental Analysis, is under preparation for publication by the Office of Mu- seum Programs.
During the past 12 months an exciting fermentation has begun in the area of Public Service. This activity is in response to the impact of a larger public interest in a more extensive Smithsonian Institu- tion, and, in equal measure, to a notably more discerning public interest in the educational potential of the Smithsonian museums and galleries, and their programs. In building the resources and the organization to meet these challenges, the Public Service divisions are helping to bring into balance the Institution's fulfillment of Mr. Smithson's mandate for the diffusion of knowledge as well as its increase.
The Old Patent Office Building was commemorated as a National Historic Landmark in a ceremony held April 3, 1974, in the courtyard of that building, which houses the National Collection of Fine Arts and the National Portrait Gallery. Shown affixing the plaque are Harry Jordan, Assistant to the Director of NCFA; Mrs. Richard Nixon; and Secretary Ripley. Others present for the ceremony included, from left, Meredith Johnson, Office of Public Affairs; Mrs. David E. Finley; Ronald Walker, Director of the National Park Service; David E. Finley, Commissioner of NCFA and NPG; Charles Blitzer, Assistant Secretary for History and Art; Joshua Taylor, Director of NCFA; Mrs. Ripley; and Marvin Sadik, Director of NPG.
Other events in which the staff participated were Mrs. Nixon's installation of the Department of the Interior's historic site plaque at the National Collection of Fine Arts National Portrait Gallery building's courtyard. Speaker Carl Albert's presentation of a portrait of himself, and Mrs. Johnson's presentation of a bust of President Johnson.
The Special Events staff was also responsible for arrangements when a group of Congressional wives honored Mrs. Gerald Ford in the Commons, with an evening of entertainment by the British Players. The Secretaries of Commerce and Treasury and the Direc- tor of the Environmental Protection Agency hosted parties and tours for several Soviet Union delegations; and the Secretary held the biennial Diplomatic Dinner at the Renwick Gallery for the heads of 18 foreign missions and a Fourth of July party for other diplo- mats on the terrace of the Museum of History and Technology to watch the Monument fireworks.
Also linked to the Bicentennial are plans started in 1974 for a symposium, "Kin and Communities: The Peopling of America," scheduled for May 1976 as a scholarly prelude to the Smithsonian Institution National Park Service Festival of American Folklife. The symposium is being organized in liaison with other units of the Smithsonian and in cooperation with the Department of His- tory, American University, among other external organizations. Consultants include Dr. Robert Coles, psychiatrist. Harvard Uni- versity; Eli Evans, author of The Provincials; Dr. Albert Gollin, Bureau of Social Science Research, Inc.; Dr. David Goslin, sociolo- gist. National Academy of Sciences; Dr. Margaret Mead, American Museum of Natural History ;"and Allon Schoener, author of Portal to America: The Lower East Side, 1870-1925.
A new year and a new president began concurrently as Dr. Sidney Nelson assumed the presidency of Reading Is Fundamental, Inc., in August 1973.
The major source of rif's current support, a three year grant of $1,150,000 from the Edna McConnell Clark Foundation, will termi- nate in 1975. With this in view, the Board of Directors under the able leadership of Mrs. Robert S. McNamara, initiated a four-year campaign to solicit funds from foundations, corporations, and interested individuals.
Linda Johnson Robb (left) and Julie Nixon Eisenhower examine some printed materials shown them by Dr. Sidney Nelson, President of Reading Is Fundamental, Inc.
A new expanded rif program for the Capital was launched under the leadership of Mrs. Elliott L. Richardson and Mrs. Joseph J. Sisco. Funds for the program which will serve 30,000 children dur- ing the next three years have been provided by the Morris and Gwendolyn Cafritz Foundation, the Eugene and Agnes E, Meyer Foundation, the National Home Library Foundation, and the Hattie M. Strong Foundation.
Fiscal year 1974 also saw the introduction of Seeing the Smith- sonian, the official guidebook to the Institution, in four foreign languages — French, German, Japanese, and Spanish. Mr. Kenneth Rush, then Deputy Secretary of State, spoke at the introductory
Houses in Provence (detail), by Paul Cezanne. National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., Collection of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon (2655).
The national gallery of art, although formally established as a bureau of the Smithsonian Institution, is an autonomous and sepa- rately administered organization. It is governed by its own Board of Trustees, the statutory members of which are the Chief Justice of the United States, Chairman; the Secretary of State; the Secre- tary of the Treasury; and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institu- tion, all ex officio; and five general trustees. Paul Mellon continued as president of the Gallery and John Hay Whitney as vice president. The other general trustees continuing to serve were Dr. Franklin D. Murphy and Stoddard M. Stevens. In March 1974, Mr. Lessing J. Rosenwald resigned after ten years as a trustee; Mr. Carlisle H. Humelsine, President of Colonial Williamsburg, was elected to succeed him.
A number of important works of art were acquired. Of particular note were the paintings: Paul Cezanne's Houses in Provence and Paul Gauguin's Te Pape Nave Nave, gifts of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon, The year was also noteworthy because of the acquisition of numerous and important sculptures including Pietro Tacca's The Pistoia Crucifix, Antonio Canova's Hercules Slaying Lichas, two works by Foggini: Bacchus and Ariadne and Venus and Cupid, and two highly significant twentieth-century works: Wilhelm Lehm- bruck's Seated Man and Alberto Giacometti's The Invisible Object.
Under the chairmanship of Mrs. J. Willard Marriott, the 121- member President's Advisory Committee on the Arts continued to advise and assist in Center activities. During the year, the Advisory Committee was particularly active in fund-raising activities and in the development of the Alliance for Arts Education.
Frelinghuysen The Honorable J. William Fulbright Mrs. George A. Garrett Leonard H. Goldenson H. R. Haldeman Mrs. Rebekah Harkness Mrs. Paul H. Hatch Frank N. Ikard
The Honorable Edward M. Kennedy The Honorable Thomas H. Kuchel Gustave L. Levy Mrs. Michael J. Mansfield Mrs. J. Willard Marriott
Dr. Roger D. Abrahams. Chairman, Department of English, Professor of Eng- lish and Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
Dr. Muriel M. Herman. Civic, art, and college affairs, "20 Hundred" Nottingham Road, Allentown Pennsylvania (Honorary Member).
Dr. Donald S. Farner. Chairman, Department of Zoology, University of Wash- ington, Seattle, Washington (Honorary Member).
Dr. Frank B. GoUey. Executive Director, Institute of Ecology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia.
Dr. David Hawkins. Director, Mountain View Center for Environmental Educa- tion, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado.
Dr. Jan LaRue. Director of Graduate Studies, Department of Music, New York University, New York City (Honorary Member).
Dr. James L. Liverman. Director, Division of Biomedical and Environmental Research, U. S. Atomic Energy Commission, Washington, D.C.
Dr. Ruth Patrick. Chairman of the Board, The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Mr. Philip C. Ritterbush. Center for the Study of Popular Education and Recreation, Wallpack Village, New Jersey.
Dr. Rainer Zangerl. Chairman, Department of Geology, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois (Honorary Member).
Helen L. Horowitz. A study of American zoos as cultural institutions, with Dr. Lillian B. Miller, Department of History, National Portrait Gallery, from September 1, 1973, through December 31, 1973.
Juan R. Munizaga. A study of physical anthropology of pre-Columbian popula- tions, with Dr. Donald J. Ortner, Department of Anthropology, from August 15, 1973, through August 14, 1974.
Douglas R. Parks. A study of Pawnee-Arikara linguistics and ethnohistory, with Dr. John C. Ewers, Department of Anthropology, from August 1, 1973, through July 31, 1974.
Katherine M. Weist.* Collection and initial analysis of the historical materials pertaining to the Indians of Montana, with Dr. William C. Sturtevant, Depart- ment of Anthropology, from September 1, 1973, through May 31, 1974.
Thomas R. Wessel.* Investigation of the means by which the Bureau of Indian Affairs developed and implemented government policies under the Dawes Act, with Dr. John C. Ewers, Department of Anthropology, from September 1, 1973, through May 31, 1974.
John E. Yellen. Examination of archaeological and ethnographic materials from South Africa, with Dr. Clifford Evans, Department of Anthropology, from September 15, 1973, through January 31, 1975.
Marie E, Hallam. Development of a Lunar thermal evolution model, with Dr. John Wood, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Aurelio De Gasparis. Crystalline inclusions of ferromagnetic materials in tek- tites, with Dr. Brian H. Mason, Department of Mineral Sciences from January 1, 1974, through December 31, 1974.
Anthony C. Onyeagocha. Petrochemistry of the Galapagos volcanic rocks, with j Dr. Thomas Simkin, Department of Mineral Sciences, from July 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
Ilan Golani. Non-metric analysis of the display of the Tasmanian Devil through the use of movement notation, with Dr. John Eisenberg, National Zoological Park, from July 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
Cornelis W. Raven. Physiology of phytochrome-controlled reactions, with Dr. Walter A. Shropshire, Radiation Biology Laboratory, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Tung-Iin Wu. A study of dissolved matter and organic matters in estuary en- vironments, with Dr. Francis S. L. Williamson, Chesapeake Bay Center for Environmental Studies, from June 15, 1973, through June 14, 1974.
Ginter Ekis. A study of _ systematics, natural history, and zoogeography of Colyphus, with Dr. Terry Erwin, Department of Entomology, from July 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
Thomas H. Fraser. Contributions toward a revision of the pantropical Cardinal Fish genus Apogon, with Dr. Ernest A. Lachner, Department of Vertebrate Zoology, from November 1, 1973, through October 31, 1974.
Helen A. Kennedy. Systematic study of New World generic relationships in Marantaceae, with Dr. Lyman B. Smith, Department of Botany, from January 1, 1974, through December 31, 1974.
Frederick H. C. Hotchkiss. A study of the phylogeny of the Asteroidea with Asteroids collected during the International Indian Ocean Expedition, with Dr. David L. Pawson, Department of Invertebrate Zoology, from October 15, 1973, through October 14, 1974.
Heinz A. KoIImann. A study of the paleobiology of Mesozoic Gastropods, with Dr. Erie G. Kauffman, Department of Paleobiology, from June 4, 1973, through June 3, 1974.
Katherine S. Ralls. A study of sexual dimorphism in antelopes, with Dr. Rich- ard W. Thorington, Department of Vertebrate Zoology, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Edgardo J. Romero. A study of fossil angiosperm leaves by the leaf architec- tural method, with Dr. Leo J. Hickey, Department of Paleobiology, from Feb- ruary 1, 1974, through January 31, 1975.
Adam Urbanek. A study of the ultrastructure of invertebrates with organic skeletons, with Dr. Kenneth M. Towe, Department of Paleobiology, from Sep- tember 1, 1973, through November 10, 1973.
Elaine H. Koppelman. The career of British mathematician, J. J. Sylvester, with Dr. Uta C. Merzbach, Department of Science and Technology, from Septem- ber 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Michael M. Sokal. Analytic and narrative biography of James McKeen Cattell, with Dr. Audrey B. Davis, Department of Science and Technology, from Sep- tember 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Patricia S. Watlington. A study of agriculture in early Kentucky, 1775-1820, with Dr. John T. Schlebecker, Department of Industries, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Paul J. Campanella. Study of evolution and diversity of mating strategies in New World tropical odonates, with Dr. Martin Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropi- cal Research Institute, from November 1, 1973, through October 31, 1974.
Donald L. Kramer. A comparative study of food selection in some tropical fishes feeding on detritus and aufwuchs, with Dr. Martin Moynihan, Smith- sonian Tropical Research Institute, from October 1, 1973, through September 30, 1974.
Michael L. May. A study of temperature responses of tropical dragonflies, with Dr. Michael H. Robinson, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from Janu- ary 1, 1974, through December 31, 1974.
Robert R. Warner. Field and laboratory analysis of the evolutionary and eco- logical significance of hermaphroditism, with Dr. Ira Rubinoff, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from September 15, 1973, through September 14, 1974.
Donald M. Windsor. A study of the evolution of sociability in polybiine wasps, with Dr. Neal G. Smith, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from Septem- ber 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Curtis M. Hinsley. The science of man: anthropology in Washington, D.C., 1880-1910, with Dr. Nathan Reingold, Joseph Henry Papers, from July 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
Eunice E. Mason. Historical-cultural study of the West Indian immigrants to the Panama Canal Zone, with Dr. Roy Bryce-Laporte, Research Institute on Immigration and Ethnic Studies, from November 15, 1973, through November 14, 1974.
Anne D. Shapiro. Uses and performance practices in popular and folk music of 18th-century America, with Mrs. Cynthia Hoover, Department of Cultural History, from December 15, 1973, through December 14, 1974.
Susan M. Strasser. The effects of household technology on the roles of women in America, with Miss Rodris Roth, Department of Cultural History, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Robert S. Corruccini. Research on'variation humanoid dentition and on varia- tion between populations of Virginia Indians, with Dr. Donald J. Ortner, Department of Anthropology, from February 1, 1974, through January 31, 1975.
Laura J. Greenberg. Structural analysis of design, specifically Pueblo pottery patterns, with Dr. William C. Sturtevant, Department of Anthropology, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Kiyoshi Yamaura. A study of the Eskimo harpoon heads and their history, with Dr. William W. Fitzhugh, Department of Anthropology, from July 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
Thomas E. Cravens. Study of atomic collisional processes of interest to astro- physics, with Dr. Alexander Dalgarno, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa- tory, from September 1, 1973, through May 31, 1974.
Jean W. Goad. A spectroscopic study of the kinematics in the Sb galaxy M81, with Dr. Rudolph E. Schild, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from September 1, 1973, through May 31, 1974.
Carlton R. Pennypacker. Infrared search for pulsars and study of optical pulsars with Dr. Costas Papaliolios, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from September 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
Kenneth P. Topka. Theoretical and observational research in relativistic as- trophysics, cosmology, stellar structure, evolution, and the interstellar medium, with Dr. Alexander Dalgarno, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from September 1, 1973, through May 31, 1974.
William E. Wiesel. Research on the statistics of the two-body and restricted three-body gravitational problems, with Dr. Myron Lecar, Smithsonian Astro- physical Observatory, from September 1, 1973, through May 31, 1974.
Michael Zeilik. Infrared astronomy of H II regions, with Dr. Giovanni Fazio, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from September 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
William T. Potts. A study of Palestinian early Bronze Age ceramics, composi- tion, and technology, with Dr. William G. Melson, Department of Mineral Sciences, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Robert E. Dietz. Study of biosystematics of the genus Macrocneme Hubner, with Dr. W. Donald Duckworth, Department of Entomology, from August 15, 1973, through February 14, 1974.
Cynthia L. Lewis. Study of reproduction and development in the Gooseneck Barnacle, Pollicipes polymerus, with Dr. Thomas E. Bowman, Department of Invertebrate Zoology, from July 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
C. P. Sreemadhavan. Study of leaf morphology in angiosperm systematics, with Dr. Leo J. Hickey, Department of Paleobiology, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Robert E. Vorek. Study of functional morphology of primate foot including osteometric and myological analysis of the feet of various members of the anthropoidea, with Dr. Richard W. Thorington, Department of Vertebrate Zoology, from August 1, 1973, through July 31, 1974.
Bruce R. Wardlaw. Study of biostratigraphy and paleoecology of the Gerster Formation (Upper Permian) in Nevada and Utah, with Dr. Richard E. Grant, Department of Paleobiology, from September 1, 1973, through May 31, 1974.
Karen M. Adams. Study of the iconography of the Negro in 19th-century American painting and literature, with Dr. Lois M. Fink, National Collection of Fine Arts, from September 21, 1973, through September 20, 1974.
Peter P. Morrin. Study of the art, teaching, and theory of Hans Hofmann, with Dr. Lois M. Fink, National Collection of Fine Arts, from December 1, 1973, through July 31, 1974.
Linda H. Skalet. A study of the role of the private collector and collection in American art history, with Dr. Lois M. Fink, National Collection of Fine Arts, from January 1, 1974, through December 31, 1974.
Roberta K. TarbelL A catalogue raisonne of the carved sculpture of William Zorach, with Dr. Lois M. Fink, National Collection of Fine Arts, from July 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
Barbara B. ZabeL A study of the impact of science and technology on modern art, 1900-1915, with Dr. Lois M. Fink, National Collection of Fine Arts, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Judith K. Zilczer. A study of the aftermath of the Armory Show; American art theory and criticism, 1913-1923, with Dr. Lois M. Fink, National Collection of Fine Arts, from August 1, 1973, through July 31, 1974.
Saroj K. Ghose. A study of the introduction and development of the electric telegraph in India, with Dr. Bernard S. Finn, Department of Science and Tech- nology, from July 1, 1973, through June 30, 1974.
Paul A. Hanle. A study of the origins of and influences on the early statistical physics research of Erwin Schrodinger, 1910-1925, with Dr. Paul Forman, De- partment of Science and Technology, from September 1, 1973, through August 31, 1974.
Russel W. Chamberlayne, George Washington University. General survey of museum textile handling and research methods, with Mrs. Rita Adrosko, National Museum of History and Technology.
Sandra K. Lund, Gallaudet College. General archival studies, with Mr. Richard Lytle, Smithsonian Archives.
Gerald J. Rosenzweig, Gallaudet College. General archival studies, with Mr. Richard Lytle, Smithsonian Archives.
Lorraine Bigman, Navajo Community College, Arizona. General anthropologi- cal archival studies, with Dr. Herman Viola, National Museum of Natural History.
Katherine M. Condli£fe, George Washington University. Analysis of Bushman camps, with Dr. John Yellen, National Museum of Natural History.
J. Richard Haefer, University of Illinois. Study of Plains Indians musical in- struments, with Dr. John Ewers, National Museum of Natural History.
Afifa Hassan, Southern Methodist University. Studies on bone material using X-ray electron microscope and microprobe, with Dr. Donald Ortner, National Museum of Natural History.
David Kiyaga-Mulindwa, Johns Hopkins University. Correlation of linguistic, archaeological, ethnographic, and oral data in reconstructing the Iron Age cul- tures of East and Central Africa, with Dr. Gordon Gibson, National Museum of Natural History.
Joseph M. Konno, Rider College, New Jersey. A study of Puluwatan naviga- tional lore, with Dr. Saul Riesenberg, National Museum of Natural History.
James H. Nottage, University of Wyoming. Study of Plains Indians material culture, with Dr. William Sturtevant, National Museum of Natural History.
Peter W. Ochs, Jewish Theological Seminary. Transcription and analysis of Puluwatan oral navigational lore, with Dr. Saul Riesenberg, National Museum of Natural History.
Arlyn H. Sharpe, University of Maryland. Studies in the ethnographic collec- tion, v/ith Dr. Eugene Knez, National Museum of Natural History.
Augustine Smith, Navajo Community College, Arizona. General anthropologi- cal archival studies, with Dr. Herman Viola, National Museum of Natural History.
Deborah R. Van Brunt, Yale University. Project on North American Indians, with Dr. William Sturtevant, National Museum of Natural History.
Katherine DuVivier, Williams College. Project to develop an experimental touch exhibit, with Dr. Harold Banks, National Museum of Natural History.
Lana M. Everett,* Swarthmore College. Bibliographic cataloguing for Charles Darwin Foundation and also Galapagos Islands research, with Dr. Thomas Simkin, National Museum of Natural History.
Lee M. Gray,* Colgate University. Classification of Permian brachiopods from Pakistan, with Dr. Richard Grant, National Museum of Natural History.
Bonnie B. Robinson,* Oberlin College. Petrological study of historic lavas from Cascade Mountains to South America, with Dr. James Powell, National Museum of Natural History.
Jo Ann Rosenfeld,* Johns Hopkins Medical School. Study of fossil marine mammals with Dr. Clayton Ray, National Museum of Natural History.
Trudie L. Blackwell, Clemson University. Study of zoo animal medical pro- cedures, with Dr. Clinton Gray, National Zoological Park.
Fred B. Blood, Virginia Commonwealth University. Study of Unionid fauna of Atlantic Central Virginia, with Dr. Joseph Morrison, National Museum of Natural History.
Philip D. Perkins, University of Maryland. Study of taxonomy of larval stages of Hydrophilidae and Hydraenidae, with Dr. Paul Spangler, National Museum of Natural History.
Marceile B. Riddick, Virginia Commonwealth University. Collection of fresh water mussels in Virginia, with Dr. Joseph Morrison, National Museum of Natural History.
Roy S. Klein, Case Western Reserve University. Study of the development of American steel industry using the Smithsonian's Alexander Holley drawings, with Dr. Otto Mayr, National Museum of History and Technology.
Elizabeth C. Luebbert, Wellesley College. Work on the Computer History Proj- ect, with Mr. Henry S. Tropp, National Museum of History and Technology.
Anne M. Millbrooke, Boise State College. Processing and handling materials associated with the Joseph Henry Papers, with Dr. Nathan Reingold, Joseph Henry Papers.
Patricia A. Mooney, University of Cincinnati. Study with the Joseph Henry Papers, with Dr. Nathan Reingold, Joseph Henry Papers.
Robert Rosecrans, Yale University. Research into the origins of pediatrics as a speciality in the United States at the turn of the 20th century, with Dr. Audrey Davis, National Museum of History and Technology.
Janet E. Surkin, University of California. Research for the Joseph Henry Papers, with Dr. Nathan Reingold, Joseph Henry Papers.
Richard E. Beard, Emory University. Training in museum curatorship, with Mr. Marvin Sadik, National Portrait Gallery.
Kenneth A. Yellis, University of Rochester. Training in museum curatorship, with Mr. Marvin Sadik, National Portrait Gallery.
Brenda Lynch, Antioch College. Development of a media program involving both photography and videotaping of museum activities relating to or of use for the educational department, with Mrs. Teresa Grana, National Collection of Fine Arts.
Edward J. Weisenbach, Antioch College. Applications of media in museum programs, with Mrs. Teresa Grana, National Collection of Fine Arts.
John F. Commander, University of Maryland. Preliminary research into appli- cations of aeronautical and space-related scientific and technological develop- ments to Earth-bound uses, with Dr. Louis Bucciarelli, National Air and Space Museum.
Theodorus Costopoulos, George Washington University. Investigation of how power engineering has been affected by technological developments within the air and space industry, with Dr. Louis Bucciarelli, National Air and Space Museum.
Ronald E. Jutila, Georgetown University. Investigations of spin-offs of space travel technology as they benefit Earth-bound apparatus, with Dr. Louis Buc- ciarelli, National Air and Space Museum.
Richard B. LeBaron, George Washington University. Study of some of the gen- eral societal effects of air and space technology in terms of attitude shifts and cultural impacts, with Dr. Louis Bucciarelli, National Air and Space Museum.
James D. Maloney, George Washington University. Study to determine which future energy source developed from the space program would be best invest- ment for future payoff in meeting and relieving some of the energy shortage, with Dr. Louis Bucciarelli, National Air and Space Museum.
Jane Adams. Organized and indexed photos and slides from the Pakistan An- cient Technology Program, with Dr. Owen Rye, National Museum of Natural History.
Amanda Brown, New College, Florida. Assisted in arrangement of anthro- pological archival materials, also reference and correspondence regarding In- dian Art, with Mr. James Glenn, National Museum of Natural History.
Marianna Doyle, Dunbarton College. Undertook the duties of a Museum Tech- nician in the Department of Invertebrate Zoology, with Dr. Thomas Bowman, National Museum of Natural History.
Dale Gnidovec, Muskingum College. Worked toward familiarization with vari- ous ancillary aspects of museum work anticipating going on to more advanced level, with Dr. Nicholas Hotton, National Museum of Natural History.
Lois Hentzschel, Dunbarton College. Trained to learn all facets of museum operations, specifically registration, exhibit, and conservation procedures, with Mr. Lloyd Herman, Renwick Gallery.
Michel Monsour, Tulane University. Engaged in photographing Washington Victorian townhouses threatened with demolition in the vicinity of Judiciary Square and Dupont Circle, with Mr. James Goode, Smithsonian Institution Building.
Nancy Moore, University of Maryland. A general examination of Greek coins, dealing with a number of problems encountered in research in this area, with Dr. Vladimir Clain-Stefanelli, National Museum of History and Technology.
Karen L. Moss, University of Massachusetts. Sorting and organizing the re- serve collection from China, with Dr. Eugene Knez, National Museum of Natu- ral History.
Dennis Mroczkowski, George Washington University. Research on and iden- tification of Zouave uniforms and research on U. S. Army field uniforms, 1940- 1953, with Mr. Donald Kloster, National Museum of History and Technology.
Dante Querdo, University of Massachusetts. Research to prepare an annotated bibliography of all manuscripts, publications, and specimens relating to James Smithson, the founder of the Smithsonian, with Mr. James Goode, Smithsonian Institution Building.
Nancy Reichman, New College, Florida. Tabulating and preparing a large body of unpublished data on American Indians from the 1970 census and research on Indians east of the Mississippi River and correspondence with a number of Eastern states offices in obtaining data on the legal status of present-day Indians in those states, with Dr. Samuel Stanley, National Museum of Natural History.
Anita Rolle, College of Notre Dame of Maryland. Cataloguing a collection of early 20th-century dressmaking fabrics, with Mrs. Rita Adrosko, National Mu- seum of History and Technology.
Nancy Welch, University of Massachusetts. Independent study project on mu- seum education, with Mrs. Teresa Grana, National Collection of Fine Arts.
Cumming Miss Viola E. Cureton Dr. and Mrs. Gilbert Dalldorf Mrs. D. Innes Dann Mr. and Mrs. James Dawson Dr. Lewis Hillard Dennis General Jacob L. Devers Mr. and Mrs. Bern Dibner Mr. and Mrs. Allen T. Dittman Dr. and Mrs. Lowell R. Ditzen Captain and Mrs. Robert F. Doss Miss Claire A. Dye Mr. and Mrs. Bryan N. Eagle Mrs. Tom J. Eals Mr. and Mrs. Charles Eames Mr. and Mrs. Robert Earnest Mr. Gerald S. Eilberg Mr. and Mrs. J. Barton Elliotte Miss Ann Erdman Miss Gretchen Estel Mr. James E. Farrell, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Waldron Faulkner Miss Judith R. Fetter Mrs. R. A. Fewlass Dr. Leo S. Figiel Lieutenant Colonel and
Mrs. James Fischer Mr. and Mrs. Ralph H. Fisher Mrs. Lillie Fitzgerald Rear Admiral and Mrs. Francis Fleck The Honorable and Mrs. Edward Foley Mrs. Rowland G. Freeman Miss Margaret Mary Frowe Mr. and Mrs. Geoffrey Fuller Miss Joyce Fuller Mr. Walter 5. Furlow Mr. and Mrs. Sebastian Gaeda Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Gardner Mrs. T. Fleetwood Garner Mr. T. Jack Gary Mr. W. E. Gathright Mr. and Mrs. Carl S. Gewirz Mr. Philip M. Gignaux Mr. and Mrs. O. Rundle Gilbert Mr. and Mrs. T. K. Glennan Mr. and Mrs. Charles Glover III Colonel and Mrs. Julius Goldstein
Mrs. S. S. Houston Mr. W. Barrett Howell Mrs. Edward F. Hutton Miss Barbara D. Hyde Mr. and Mrs. Frank N. Ikard Mrs. Mary Ellen Johansen Mrs. Paul C. Johnson Mr. and Mrs. William C. Keller Miss Irene Kent Mr. Walter H. Kidd Mrs. John Kimball Mr. and Mrs. William R. Knowlton Mr. and Mrs. Philip Knox, Jr. Mr. Harold C. Kohfeld Colonel and Mrs. Charles W. Kouns Mrs. Paul H. Krauss Mr. and Mrs. David Lloyd Kreeger Mr. Peter Kussi Mrs. Percy L. Kynaston Mr. and Mrs. S. J. Lanaham Mr. and Mrs. Anthony A. Lapham Mrs. Oscar Lasdon
Mr. and Mrs. William S. Weedon Mrs. Norma Christine Wertz Mr. and Mrs. Robert B. Whitney Miss Edith S. Wicksell Mr. and Mrs. J. R. Wiggins Mr. and Mrs. Alanson Willcox Mrs. Harry G. Wilson Mrs. William E. Wilson
Mrs. Gerald C. Smith Mr. and Mrs. Joe Pitts Smith Mr. Lamar A. Smith Mr. and Mrs. Robert T. Smith Miss Shirley A. Smith Mr. and Mrs. Larry Snodgrass Mr. J. Morse Sonith
John Clifford Folger Mr. Cornelius Van S. Roosevelt Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Mr. P. A. B. Widener Mr. and Mrs. Sidney S. Zlotnick
Lewis A. Lapham, Chairman Harry Hood Bassett William Blackie John W. Brooks Richard P. Cooley Joseph F. Cullman 3rd Harry B. Cunningham Paul L. Davies Leonard K. Firestone Charles T. Fisher III G. Keith Funston Alfred C. Glassell, Jr. Mrs. David L. Guyer Ben W. Heineman
Henry J. Heinz II William A. Hewitt Frank Y. Larkin George C. McGhee Mrs. Robert S. McNamara Ruben F. Mettler Roger Milliken Charles M. Pigott Mrs. Malcolm Price Francis C. Rooney, Jr. Merritt Kirk Ruddock Thomas J. Watson, Jr. James O. Wright
Horses Dr. Joshua Taylor To Give Lecture on Pacific Northwest Art R. V. Johnson Will Be Launched January 26 at Ft. Pierce, Fla. National Portrait Gallery Receives Pearl Buck Portrait Smithsonian Publishes Definitive Monograph on 19th
Come Gloria Steinem Will Speak in Popular Culture Series Dr. Jdenek David Appointed New Librarian for Woodrow
July 22. "Indians in Washington." Dr. Herman Viola of the National Anthro- \ pological Archives describes how the American Government used diplomacy rather than force, in dealing with the Indians in the early 19th century.
October 21. "Hammarskjold, the Man." A look at the late Secretary-General of the United Nations, "an austere and enigmatic man," with Ambassador and Mrs. Rajushwar Dayal, who were among Hammarskjold's closest associates.
December 16. "The Shaker Way." A look at the life and crafts of the Shaker religious sect. Guests include Mrs. Faith Andrews, a leading expert on Shaker culture, and Sister Mildred Barker, one of 14 remaining Shakers.
December 23. "Wilson's Living Memorial." Dr. James Billington, new Director of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, talks about plans for the Center's future.
January 13. "The New Immigrants." Dr. Roy Bryce-LaPorte, Director of the Smithsonian's new Institute for Immigration and Ethnic Studies, describes the lot of West Indian immigrants in the United States.
January 27. "A New Look at Learning." New trends in education, discussed by Dr. Samuel Gould, Chairman of the Commission on Non-traditional Study.
March 10. "Anthropolgy for Today." Dr. Sam Stanley, Program Coordinator for the Smithsonian's Center for the Study of Man, describes how the Center works on current human problems.
April 7. "Reflecting on History." Dr. Brooke Hindle, new director of the Na- tional Museum of History and Technology, Describes his plans for the mu- seum's future, and specifically for observing the Bicentennial. "The Scope of the Universe." An infinite subject, discussed as finitely as possible by Dr. Myron Lecar of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.
June 2. "Looking for Life in the Universe." Dr. George Field, director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, talks about possible evidence for life beyond earth.
Symposium honoring Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Smithsonian Astrophysical Ob- servatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, October 1973.
McCrosky, R. E. "Cometary Debris." Presented at The Dusty Universe Sym- posium honoring Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa- tory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, October 1973.
Wood, J. A. "The Fine-Grained Structure of Chondritic Meteorites." Presented at the Dusty Universe Symposium honoring Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Smithson- ian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, October 1973.
American Wildflowers, by Mary Veau Walcott. Freseman, Mrs. Perry, Alexandria, Virginia: Eastlake hatstand; Rococo Revivak
Gari Melchers. Wood, Mrs. N. Bissell, Washington, D.C: pair of ornamental Victorian cast- iron garden urns. Wyckoff, Mr. and Mrs. Bernard, Washington, D.C: Victorian chandelier. Young, Dorothy M. (from her estate), Washington, D.C: set of Oriental
Geiss, Dr. J., Universitat Bern, Physikalisches Institut, Switzerland: Apollo Solar Wind Experiment (backup flight unit).
Academia Nauk of the USSR, Institute of Evolutionary Morphology and Ecology, Animals (through Dr. N. Nikitsky) : beetle, type.
Fuller): 9 echinoderms; 96 crustaceans; (through Dr. H. Radclyffe Roberts): 4 grasshoppers (exchange) ; (through Dr. James Tyler) : 4 echinoderms.
Academy of Sciences of the USSR, Institute of Zoology and Botany (through Dr. K. Elberg) : 13 marsh flies. Zoological Institute (through Dr. K. B. Gorodkov) : 10 empid flies; (through Dr. V. A. Trjapitzin) : 58 chalcid flies (exchange).
Agriculture, U.S. Department of. Agricultural Research Service (through Dr. Arthur S. Barclay): 492 plants, Colombia; (through Dr. E. W. Baker): 242 acarina slides, including types, Mexico; (through Dr. Richard H. Foote) : 47,958 insects, worldwide; 2 decapod larvae. North Carolina; (through Dr. A. M. Golden) : 166 crustaceans, Nigeria; (through Dr. A. S. Menke) : 376 insects, U.S.; (through Dr. Reece I. Sailer) : 23 isopods, Chile; (through Dr. W. W. Wirth) : 92 insects, Florida; 54 Lepidoptera, 53 neuropteroids. North America. Forest Service: 17,321 insects, Japan; (through Dr. Harold E. Grelen): Andropogon specimen, Louisiana; (through Dr. Elbert L. Little, Jr.): 1,037 plants, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands. National Arboretum (through Dr. T. Dudley) : 15 plants, Peru. Systematic Entomology Laboratory (through Dr. D. C. Ferguson) : 5,697 moths.
Alabama, University of (through Dr. Herbert T. Boschung) : 809 crustaceans; 28 fish; (through Magi Cameron): 5 palms, Colombia.
Alpine Corporation (through Henry Truebe) : quartz specimen, Colorado. Altena, Dr. C. O. Van Regteren (see Rijksmuseum van Natuurlijke Historie). Altig, Dr. Ronald (see Mississippi State University). Alusuisse Metals, Inc.: crystal of gallium metal. Amaoka, Kunio (see Hokkaido University). American Museum of Natural History (through Dr. Meredith Jones) : 500
Dr. Stanley Swerdloff) : 75 marine mollusks. Anderson, Alexander G.: 13 baskets, mats, and weapons, Congo. Anderson, Dr. Donald M.r 26 weevils. Anderson, H. J. (see Westinghouse Corp.). Andrews, Murray M.: crustacean, Alaska. April, Martin: blowgun and darts, British Guiana. Aquaculture International (Australia) Pty. Ltd. (through Takuji Fujimura): 4
Peter Seeligmann) : 142 plant specimens (exchange). Arhus Universitet, Denmark (through Dr. Kai Larsen) : 44 plant specimens
Colombia. Arnell, J. Hal (see California, University of). Arthur Rylan Institute for Environmental Research, Australia (through Dr.
Robert M. Werneke) : fur seal. Ash, Dr. Sidney R.: 12 fossil plants, 14 slide preparations. Atomic Energy Commission: Puerto Rico Nuclear Center (through Delores
Ayguabibas) : 11 copepods. Auburn University (through Dr. John S. Ramsey) : 1,082 crustaceans, Alabama. Australia, Government of: The Australian Museum (through Dr. Gerald
Publications, Inc.). Ayala, Dr. Francisco J. (see California, University of). Ayguabibas, Delores (see Atomic Energy Commission). Bacon Fund, Smithsonian Institution: 86 bird skeletons. Baglin, Elizabeth G. (see Interior, U.S. Department of the). Bailey, Dr. Joseph R. (see Duke University). Bailey, Dr. R. M. (see Michigan, University of). Baker, Dr. E. W. (see Agriculture, U.S. Department of). Balcomb, Kenneth C. : 2 marine mammals. Baldwin, Dr. J. T., Jr.: 1,203 botanical specimens. Ball, Dr. George E.: 51 ground beetles; 373 centipedes. Balsbaugh, Dr. E. U.: 11 beetles. Banta, Dr. William: 2 Bryozoa slides. Barbehenn, Dr. Kyle R. (see State, U.S. Department of). Barclay, Dr. Arthur 5. (see Agriculture, U.S. Department of). Barham, Dr. Eric G.: 9 echinoderms. Barker, Mrs. Robert: 68 mineral specimens. Barkley, Dr. Fred A.: 252 plant specimens. Barkley, Dr. T. M. (see Kansas State University). Barnes, Dr. Robert D. (see Del Mar College). Barnett, Dr. Douglas E. : 10 cicadas. Barnish, Guy (see St. Lucia, W.I., Government of). Barr, Louis (see Commerce, U.S. Department of). Barr, Dr. William: 41 beetles. Barros, Neylson: 2 mineral specimens, Brazil. Bashore, Mrs. Judy C: margay cat. Bates, Robert: 5 mineral specimens. Batham, Dr. Elizabeth J.: 7 polychaetes, New Zealand. Bauchot, Dr. M. L. (through Dr. B. B. Collette): fish type. Baumann, Dr. Richard W.: 2,756 insects; 85 water beetles. Bayer, Dr. F. M. (see Miami, University of). Be, Dr. Alan W. H. : 19 foraminifera types. Beaman, Dr. John H. (see Michigan State University). Bechtel, Dr. Robert C: 2 lace bugs; 21 matispids; 108 lace bugs and cicadas;
Belgium, Government of: Jardin Botanique National de Belgique: 19 bambusa. Belicek, Joseph (see Alberta, University of). Belk, Denton (see Arizona State University). Bell, Mrs. Mae Woods (see Children's Museum). Belle, Jean: 15 dragonflies (exchange). Bellport Senior High School: Students for Environmental Quality (through
Thomas A. Woolford) : 9 mollusk specimens. Benda, Dr. Robert S. (see Aquinas College). Benfield, Dr. Fred: water beetle. Benthin, Bruce M.: 16 mineral specimens. Berdan, Dr. Jean M. (see Interior, U.S. Department of the). Berman, Dr. and Mrs. Bernard: cut emerald, Colombia. Bermuda Biological Station for Research (through Bruce C. Coull) : 393
Bethlehem Steel Corporation (through Dr. B. L. Bramfitt) : graphite specimen. Beu, Dr. A. G. (see New Zealand, Government of). Bideaux Minerals: vanadinite on barite. Bieri, Dr. Robert: 1,000 worms.
Birenheide, Dr. Rudolf (see Forschungs-Institut Senckenberg). Birkeland, Dr. Charles (see Smithsonian Institution). Bisson, Peter A. (see Oregon State University). Bjornberg, Dr. Tagea K. S. (see Universidade de Sao Paulo). Blair, Dr. Albert P.: 4 land mollusks. Blake, Dr. James A.: 225 polychaetes. Blanchard, Andre: 1,714 moths. Blewett, J. (see Great Britain, Government of). Blume, Richard R.: 10 beetles. Bode, Mrs. Helen Spalding, Estate of (through Kenneth Foster, Jr.) : 21
Brigham Young University (through Dr. C. Selby Herin) : 6 mite slides, types; (through Dr. Stanley L. Welsh): 116 plants (exchange).
California, State of: Department of Agriculture (through Dr. Alan R. Hardy): 17 beetles (gift-exchange). Department of Fish and Game (through Dick Daniel): 33 copepods; (through James L. Houk) : 2 barnacle.
California, University of: Berkeley Campus (through Dr. John L. Strother) : 252 plant specimens (gift-exchange). Davis Campus (through Dr. Francisco J. Ayala) : 15 Drosophila flies; (through R. O. Schuster): 3 thrips, Hawaii exchange); (through John M. Tucker) : 2 Calathea dressleri isotype, Panama; (through Dr. Grady L. Webster): 31 plant specimens. New Caledonia (exchange). Lawrence Livermore Laboratory (through Dr. Gilbert D. Potter) : 3 crustaceans. South Pacific; 5 bird skins and 5 bird skeletons, Eniwetok Atoll. Los Angeles Campus (through J. Hal Arnell) : 31 mosquitoes; (through Dr. Gary N. Lane) : 10 crinoids, Ordovician, Utah; (through Dr. Joseph Murdock) : 8 sulfur specimens. Riverside Campus (through W. H. Ewart) : 5 thrips; (through Dr. T. W. Fisher) : 2 marsh flies. San Diego Campus (through Dr. Carl D. Hopkins) : 49 fishes, Guyana. Scripps Institution of Oceanography (through Dr. Edward Brinton) : 3 crustaceans, Singapore; (through Dr. Abraham Fleminger) : 20 copepods, 1 slide; (through Dr. John E. McCosker) : 13 fishes; (through Dr. William A. Newman): 207 marine mollusks, including types; (through Dr. Eric Shulenberger) : 242 crustaceans.
California Academy of Sciences (through Dr. Jean Durham) : 1 fossil para- type; (through Dr. W. N. Eschmeyer and B. B. Collette) : 3 fishes, Venezuela (exchange); (through Dr. W. N. Eschmeyer): I fish holotype;
Canterbury, University of. New Zealand (through James K. Lowry) : 13 I amphipods. Canzoneri, Dr. Silvano: 8 Ephydrid flies, Italy (see also Museo Civico de
Storia Naturale). Capriles, Dr. J. Maldonado: 532 Hemiptera, 97 Lepidoptera and Diptera, 464 i Coleoptera; 696 Hemiptera (exchange) ; 2 assassin bugs (see also Puerto
Rico, University of). Carestia, Maj. Ralph R. (see Defense, U.S. Department of). Caribbean Marine Biological Institute, Curacao (through Dr. Jan H. Stock) : 35
Carnegie Museum (through Dr. George Wallace) : 18 chalcid-flies (exchange). Carpenter, Ray: 3 mineral specimens. Carriers, Bruno: 23 mineral specimens, (exchanges). Carter, John L.: 126 brachiopod fossils. Casey Fund, Smithsonian Institution: 4,033 Coleoptera, Africa and South
America. Cashatt, Dr. E. D.: 2 small moths. Central America. Cather, Mary R. : 10 caddisflies. Causey, Dr. Nell B.: 34 millipedes, including types. Cayouette, Richard (see Canada, Government of). Central University of Venezuela (through Rafael M. Escarbassiere) : 39 marine
Chamberlain Fund, Smithsonian Institution: 5 mineral specimens. Chambers, Dr. Kenton L. (see Oregon State University). Chambers, Mr. and Mrs. W. Craig: cut tanzanite. Chan, Ky (see Chinese University of Hong Kong). Chandler, Donald S. : 4 beetles.
Chapin, Dr. Joan B.: 6 beetles (see also Louisiana State University). Chapman, Dr. Carl (see Miami Sea Aquarium). Chatham County Mosquito Control Commission, Georgia (through Virginia
T. Mullen) : 6 crustaceans. Chaw, Dr. Lai Hoi (see Universiti Sains Malaysia). Chelan County Cooperative Extension Service, Washington (through John M.
Cobban, Dr. W. A. (see Interior, U.S. Department of the). Cochrane, Theodore S. (see Wisconsin, University of). Coffey, Vince (see Georgia, University of). Cogan, Dr. Brian (see Britain, Government of). Cohen, Mrs. Anne: 15 marine mollusks, Azores.
Cohen, Dr. Daniel M. (see Oregon State University and Krefft, Dr. Gerhard). Coleman, Neville: 85 echinoderms, Australia. Collette, Dr. B. B. (see Bauchot, Dr. M. L.; California Academy of Sciences;
Universidad Nacional de Colombia). Collins, Dr. Charles: bird skeleton. Colorado, University of: Museum (through Dr. William A. Weber): 132 plant
Nielsen) : 3 fishes. Corcoran, Edward J. (see Beck, Dorothy Bateman, Estate of). Corey, Roscoe: danalite specimen. Cornell University (through Dr. William L. Brown, Jr.): 3 ants (exchange) ;
Croat, Dr. Thomas B. (see Missouri Botanical Garden). Crosnier, Dr. Alain: 53 crustaceans (see also France, Government of). Cross, Mr. and Mrs. Jarrett L.: 2,275 beetles. North America. Cuatrecasas, Dr. Jose: 1,000 plant specimens, Venezuela. Cuello, Juan (see Museo Nacional de Historia Natural). Cumbaa, Stephen L. (see Florida, University of). Currier, Rock: 2 mineral specimens. Curtis, Dr. Doris M. : 92 ostracod slides, Miocene. Czechoslovakia, Government of: National Museum in Prague: 50 bryophytes
Dailey, Dr. D. Charles: 10 wasps and galls, including types. Dalhousie University, Canada: Institute of Oceanography (through Dr. Gareth
Harding): 2 crustaceans; (through Byron Morris): 5 crustaceans, 4 slides. Dallas Museum of Natural History (through Dr. Richard W. Fullington) :
Dawson, Dr. C. E. (see Gulf Coast Research Laboratory Museum). Day, J. H.: 2,714 polychaetes, including types. Dayrit, Fernando G.: 59 mollusks, Philippines.
Defense, U.S. Department of: Department of the Air Force (through Capt. Jerry M. Davidson): 67 moths; (through Dr. Charles S. Sahagian) : 32 synthetic crystals. Department of the Army: 210 plant specimens; (through Maj. Ralph R. Carestia) 300 mollusks; (through Dr. K. C. Emerson): 907 lice; (through E. L. Peyton) : 26 mosquitoes. Department of the Navy (through Dr. K. C. Emerson): 115 lice; (through Dr. E. C. Haderlie) : 8 ostracods; (through William R. McBride) : 12 retgersite crystals; (through Lawrence Pugh) : 75 lots larval fish, 52,192 crustaceans ; (through John Schindler) : 5 birds.
Dozier, Dr. Herbert L. : 10 darking beetles, New Guinea; 5 Hemiptera and Hymenoptera; 101 beetles (exchange).
Laboratory (through Dr. Gilbert T. Rowe) : 2 amphipods. Dunn, Dr. D. B. (see Missouri, University of).
Dunn, Pete J.: 84 mineral specimens; 72 grams beryllonite, Maine. Dunn, Wilbur F. : portion of Cetothere skeleton, Miocene. Durham, Dr. Jean (see California Academy of Sciences). Dybas, Henry: 11 beetles. East African Marine Fisheries Research Organization (through Dr. A. J.
Bruce) : 5 crustaceans. Eccles, David H. : 83 lots fish specimens, Africa. Ecole Polytechnique, Canada (through Dr. J. C. Sisi) : 9 mineral specimens
Eiten, Dr. George (see Universidade de Brazilia and Instituto de Botanica). Eklund, Mrs. Carl R. : 4 antarctic bird eggs; feather blanket, 2 pairs boots,
Eskimo. Elberg, Dr. K. (see Academy of Sciences of the USSR). Elliott, Dr. William R. : 10 aquatic beetles, Mexico (see also Texas Tech
University). Ellis, Dr. R. A. (see Canada, Government of). Ellison, Mrs. W. L.: 21 bird skins, Brazil. Elsik, William C: 17 pollen and spore specimens, types. Emerson, Dr. K. C: 638 lice (see also Defense, U. S. Department of). Enamait, Ed (See Maryland, State of). England, Kent: melanophlogite specimen (exchange).
Environmental Protection Agency (through Ronald Eisler) : 3 clam specimens. Eotvos University, Hungary (through Dr. A. Borhidi) : 2 plant specimen, Cuba. Erskine College (through Dr. James G. Saxon) : 257 fishes. Erwin, Dr. Terry L. : 10,434 insects.
Escarbassiere, Rafael M. (see Central University of Venezuela). Eschmeyer, Dr. W. N. (see California Academy of Sciences). Eskow, Mrs. Seymour: cord-bound coconut water canteen, Gilbert Islands. Estevez, Ernest (see South Florida, University of). Etnier, Dr. David A. (see Tennessee, University of). Evans, Dr. Clifford: 160 archeological artifacts, Ecuador. Evans, Dr. Howard E. (see Cornell University). Even, Lance: mollusk specimen. Ewart, W. H. (see California, University of).
Exxon Co. (through Duane O. LeRoy) : 5 foraminifera type specimens. Faculte des Sciences Agronomiques, Belgium (through Dr. Jean Leclercq) :
Faunalabs, Inc. (through Dr. Neil B. Todd) : 50 frozen domestic cats. Fay, Dr. Rimmon (see Pacific Bio-Marine Supply Co.). Felder, Darryl L. (see Louisiana State University).
Figueiras, Dr. Manuel Lopez (see Universidad de los Andes). Fincham, Dr. Anthony A. (see Victoria University of Wellington). Finney, Dr. Colin M. (see New York Ocean Science Laboratory). Fischer-Piette, E.: worm specimen. Fish, Marjorie E.: mask and comb. New Guinea.
Fishbein, Dr. (see Health, Education, and Welfare, U. S. Department of). Fisher, Dr. T. W. (see California, University of). Fittkau, Dr. E. J. (see Max-Planck Institut fur Limnologie). Flavill, Paul: 34 water beetles. Fleischer, Dr. Peter: mineral specimen. Fleminger, Dr. Abraham (see California, University of). Flensborg, Imga: 5 mineral specimens (exchange). Flint, Mrs. C. M.: 169 dragonflies. Flint, Dr. Oliver S., Jr.: 574 lacewings. Florida, State of: Department of Agriculture (through Dr. E. E. Grissell) :
Forest, Dr. J. (see Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle). Formas C, Ramon (see Universidad Austral de Chile). Forschungs-Institut Senckenberg (through Dr. Rudolf Birenheide) : 6 fossil
Geijskes, Dr. D. C. (see Rijksmuseum van Natuurlijke Historic). George, Gilbert: 2 serandite specimens, Canada.
Georgia State University (through Dr. Charles H. Wharton) : 120 crustaceans. Georgia, University of (through Vince Coffey) : Lysimachia specimen,
Gibbs, Dr. Robert H.: 7 echinoderms, 40 mollusks, 174 crustaceans. Gibson, Dr. Gordon D. : 100 archeological specimens, Angola. Gilbert, Dr. B. Miles: 48 pubic bone casts. Gilbert, Dr. Carter R. (see Florida, University of). Gillaspy, Dr. Jan^es E.: 3 moths, Texas. Gillis, Dr. William T. (see Harvard University). Gillogly, Capt. Allen: 562 beetles. Gittins, Dr. John, (see Toronto, University of). Glynn, Dr. Peter W. (see Smithsonian Institution). Goff, Barney: 2 mineral specimens, Australia. Gogate, G. B.: 2 polychaete worms, India Golden, Dr. A. M. (see Agriculture, U. S. Department of). Goldman, Jane E.: Apache Indian basket.
Goldner, Mrs. Marion O. : 3 pieces of Chinese clothing, 2 Japanese pictures. Goldsmith, Merton J.: 2 marine mollusks. Goldstein, A. Edge: I lot mineral specimens. Gonsoulin, Dr. Gene: 93 styrax specimens. Goodson, Mrs. Ruby Bowe: Cherokee Indian beaded bag. Goodyear, James: 6 beetles, Africa (exchange). Gordh, Gordon: 3 chalcid-flies. Gordon, MacKenzie: 19 specimens and fragments of Ammonoidea (see also
Interior, U. S. Department of the). Gore, Dr. Robert M. (see Smithsonian Institution). Gorman, R. C. (see Australia, Government of). Gorodkov, Dr. K. B. (see Academy of Sciences of the USSR). Goteborgs Universitet, Sweden: 71 plant specimens, Ecuador.
Harrison) : 3 plant specimens and 4 drawings. Green, Peter (see Great Britain, Government of). Greenfield, Dr. David W. (see Northern Illinois University). Grelen, Dr. Harold E. (see Agriculture, U. S. Department of). Grigg, Ursula M. (see Saint Mary's University). Grissell, Dr. E. E. (see Florida, State of). Gross, Dr. G. E. (see South Australian Museum). Gruenwald, M. Henri (see Mauritania, Government of). Gruwell, John A.: 2,295 grasshoppers, 841 moths, 3,337 bees, 13,470 beetles,
Africa. Guam, University of (through Patrick Bryan) : 7 fish specimens. Guillemin, Dr. Claude: 2 mineral specimens, Trance (exchange). Gulf Coast Research Laboratory Museum (through Dr. C. E. Dawson) : 2,203
Richard Swaebe) : I axinate specimen (exchange). Hanson, Dr. Wilford J.: 52 beetles. Harding, Dr. Gareth (see Dalhousie University). Hardman, David: I mendipite specimen. Hardy, Dr. Alan R. (see California, State of). Hargraves, Audrey: 8 echinoderms, Texas, 18 marine mollusks. Harman, Walter J.: 44 worm slides (see also Louisiana State University). Harris, Mrs. Bessie B. : 24 freshwater snails. Harris, Herbert S., Jr., and Simmons, Dr. Robert S. : 2 crocodileSj Mexico, 2
Hartshorn, Gary 5. (see Universidad de Costa Rica). ' Harvard University (through Dr. James R. Kirkpatrick) : synthetic mineral specimen. Arnold Arboretum (through Dr. William T. Gillis) : 4 Palmae. Botanical Museum (through Dr. Richard Evans Schultes) : 5 plants, South America. Geological Museum (through Dr. Jun Ito) : 12 synthetic rare earth silicates. Gray Herbarium (through Dr. William T. Gillis) : 5 melastomataceae; (through Dr. Reed C. Rollins): 2,594 botanical specimens (exchanges). Museum of Comparative Zoology (through Dr. K. M. Boss): 64 worms (exchange); (through George Buckley): 1,420 mollusks (exchange); (through Michael H. Horn): 78 crustaceans; (through Dr. Bryan Patterson) : cast of Australopithecus right jaw.
Hawaii, State of: Department of Agriculture (through Dr. George Funasaki) : 2 beetles; (through William Rose): 5 compositae, Mexico.
Hawaii, University of (through Dr. Matwell S. Doty): 10 algae, types; (through William J. Hoe) : 5 hryophytes. Lyon Arboretum (through Dr. Sharon S. Ishikawa) : 290 plant specimens (exchange). Institute of Marine Biology (through Dr. John M. Miller) : 2 Medusae.
Administration (through Dr. Fishbein) : 2 crustaceans. West Africa. Public Health Service: National Communicable Disease Center (through Dr. Robert S. McLean) : 34 fishes, 1 toad, 5 lizards. Rocky Mountain Laboratory (through Dr. Conrad E. Yunker); mule deer skull.
Science Center). Holland, Dr. C. G.: 460 archeological pottery and stone specimens. Holland, Mrs. Malinda B.: Sioux Indian headed leggings and moccasins. Hollingsworth, Charles: 8 polychaetes, Barbados. Hollis, Julian: 142 bivalves. Lower Cretaceous, England (exchange). Holmgren, Dr. Patricia K. (see New York Botanical Garden). Holsinger, Dr. John R. : 2,915 crustaceans (see also Old Dominion College). Hooff, Laura (see Wilcox, Howard). Hopkins, Dr. Carl D. (see California, University of).
Hubricht, Leslie: 65 amphipods; 2 worm slides; 1 lot worms, 2 lots shrimp. Huckett, Dr. H. C: 22 Dfpferfl.
Huggins, Dr. Charles W. (see Interior, U. S. Department of the). Huggins, Dr. Donald G.: 63 stoneflies, Alaska. ,
Hughes, Warren: 19 quartz specimens. Humphrey, Dr. Philip S. (see Kansas, University of). Hunter, Jay V. (see Louisiana State University). Hunziker, Armando T. (see Universidad Nacional de Cordoba), lishi. Dr. K.: synthetic antigorite specimen (exchange). Illg, Dr. Paul L. (see Lynch, Dr. James E., and Washington, University of). Illinois Natural History Survey (through Warren U. Brigham) : 7 coleoptera
Sweden. Inland Fisheries Trust Inc. (through Michael Kennedy) : fish specimen, Ireland. Institute of Plant Protection, USSR (through Dr. G. V. Mikolajev) : 59 scarab
Luiza Thereza Deconto Dombrowski) : 187 botanical specimens. Institute Nacional de Pesquisas, Brazil: 11 Leguminosae. Institute Politecnico Nacional, Mexico (through Dr. J. Rzedowski) : 88 plant
Baglin) : vial of argentojarosite ; (through Dr. Charles W. Huggins) : 2 vials of dawsonite. Fish and Wildlife Service: 495 skins, 45 skeletons, 6 eggs of North American birds; (through Dr. Donald E. Wilson) : 2,053 mammals. Geological Survey: 6 Tretomphalus bulloides, types; (through Warren O. ■^^ Addicott) : 98 fossil gastropods and bivalves; (through Dr. Jean M. Berdan) : 216 fossil ostracods and brachiopods; (through Dr. Michael Churkin, Jr.): 21 thin sections of Devonian corals and 52 slabs; (through Dr. W. A. Cobban): 217 fossil specimens; (through Dr. Wallace de Will): 2 Devonian nautiloid; (through Dr. Raymond Douglass) : 168 fusulinids thin sections, Chile; (through Harold Drewes) : 15 tertiary volcanic rocks; (through MacKenzie Gordon): 2 cephalopod, Upper Devonian, Maryland; (through Dr. Joseph E. Hazel) : 3 drawers of ostracods; (through Dr. Dick Janda) : 1 fossil whale jaw, Oregon; (through Edward M. MacKevett, Jr.): 20 analyzed rocks, Alaska; (through Dr. 5. H. Mamay); 4 paleozoic insects. New Mexico; (through Dr. Daniel J. Milton) : 3 lots churchite/florenceite, California; (through Mary Mrose) : 2 suite of phosphate minerals, Brazil; 1 clinobisuanite, Australia; (through Dr. George J. Neuerburg) : 2 galkhaite specimen, Nevada; (through Dr. John Pojeta): 3 drawers of Silurian and Devonian Pelecypods; (through Dr. Reuben J. Ross, Jr.): 2 Blastoidocrinus; (through Harold Saunders) : 5 quartz specimens, Arkansas; (through Dr. William N. Sharp) : 5 vials of kogarkoite, Colorado; (through R. P. Sheldon) : 18 mineral specimens; (through Dr. I. G. Sohn) : 200 ostracods, 14 slides; (through Dr. James Sprinkle) : 206 crinoids; (through Ellis L. Yochelson) : 222 fossil specimens, including types. National Park Service (through Roland R. Wauer) : 2 leeches, Texas.
Iowa State University (through Dr. Richard W. Pohl) : 16 grass specimens, Costa Rica (exchange) ; 7 Cramineae, Peru.
Kingsley, Mrs. Charles P.: suit of Japanese Samurai armor, Persian war axe. Kingsley, William: Japanese Samurai sword. Kirkpatrick, Dr. James R. (see Harvard University). Klemm, Donald J.: 3 leeches.
Knapp, Dr. Leslie W. (see Smithsonian Institution). Knez, Dr. Eugene I.: shoes, bowl, ceremonial belt, Korea; scroll and 3
Vassilczenko) : 200 plant specimens (exchange). Kornicker, Dr. L. S.: 10,184 crustaceans. Koyama, Hiroshige (see National Science Museum). Kraeuter, Dr. John N. : 5 marine rhollusks. Krai, Dr. Robert (see Vanderbilt University). Krapovickas, Antonio (see Universidad Nacional del Nordeste), Krauss, N. L. H. : 4 crustaceans; 594 Diptera.
Antilles. Lajmi, Mohamed (see Smithsonian Institution). Lakela, Dr. Olga (see South Florida, University of). Lambers, Dr. D. Hille Ris: aphid slide, Africa. Landrum, Betty J. (see Smithsonian Institution). Lane, Dr. N. Gary (see California, University of). Langley, Walter (see Gulf Coast Research Laboratory Museum). Larsen, Dr. Kai (see Arhus Universitet). Larsen, Ronald J. (see Puerto Rico, University of).
Larson, William: 40 mineral specimens (see also Pala Properties International). Lasmanis, Raymond: arsenic specimen, Canada. Laurence University (through Dr. Allen M. Young) : 17 plant specimens, Costa
Rica. Laurent, M. de Saint (see Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle). Lavigne, Dr. Robert J.: 152 ants, types, Puerto Rico. Lawrence, Dr. J. (see South Florida, University of). Lawrence, Dr. John F. : 4 fungus beetles.
Lawson, Dr. Thomas J. (see Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution). Leclercq, Dr. Jean (see Faculte des Sciences Agronomiques). Lee, Dr. Albert F. : pottery whistle, Mexico. Lee, C. Bruce: 2 Lepidoptera, Asia. Lee, Dr. D. C. (see South Australian Museum). Lee, Lester (through William W. Warner) : marine mollusk. Leech, Dr. Hugh B.: 561 beetles (exchange). Lees, Dennis C. (see Marine Biological Consultants, Inc.). Lehigh University (through Dr. J. D. Ryan) : 13,996 Peruvian fossils, 4 land
Lewis, Mrs. John S. (see Lewis, Rear Adm. John S., Estate of). Lewis, Rear Adm. John S., Estate of (through Mrs. John S. Lewis) : carved
Lopes, Dr. H. de Souza: 225 fleshflies. South America. Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History (through Dr. James H.
McLean) : 140 marine mollusks. Louisiana State University (through Dr. Joan B. Chapin) : 6 moths; (through
Jr.) bird mummy, Philippines (exchange). Lourteig, Dr. Alicia (see Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle). Lowery, Dr. George H. (see Louisiana State University). Lowry, James K. (see Canterbury, University of). Lubbock, Roger (see Great Britain, Government of). Ludlow, Smith, and Cann, Inc. (through F. L. Smith) : 38 mineral specimens
Madurai University, India (through P. Navaneethakrishnan) : 20 shrimp. Mailloux, Gerard: I centipede. Major, Mrs. Bernard P.: 2 pottery vessels, Iran. Malaya, University of, Malaysia: 61 plant specimens (exchange) ; (through
Mamay, Dr. S. H. (see Interior, U. S. Department of the). Manchester, University of. Great Britain (through Dr. Joan Watson) : 15 fossil
Museum). Marcus, Mrs. Eveline: marine moUnsk, Barbados. Marcus, Mr. and Mrs. Philip: Eocene gastropod. Marcus, Philip: 2 stilbite specimens. Marie Selby Botanical Gardens (through Dr. Calaway H. Dodson). 393
A. Newman) : 2 crustaceans and 8 slides, southwest Atlantic. Marine Biological Consultants, Inc. (through Dennis C. Lees) : 2 medusae. Marine Biological Station, Yugoslavia (through Dr. Joze Stirn) : 162 crustaceans
Brazil. McAlpin, Dr. Bruce W. : 7 ferns, Costa Rica. McBride, William R. (see Defense, U. S. Department of). McCosker, Dr. John E. (see California, University of). McCrosky, Dr. Richard E. (see National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Fund). McDaniel, Dr. Sidney: 73 botanical specimens. McDonald, D. C. : 87 prehistoric Australian lithic tools. McDonnell, Unity: centipede, England.
McGuinness, Albert L. : 30 inesite specimens; 6 minerals (exchanges). McKeeson, Hon. John Alexander, III: mask and figure, Gabon. McLachlan, Dr. Anton (see Port Elizabeth, University of). McLaughlin, Dr. Patsy A. (see Miami, University of).
McLean, Dr. James H. (see Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History). McLean, Dr. Robert S. (see Health, Education, and Welfare, U. S. Department
Medici, Dr. John C: 2 chalcopyrite specimen; 2 mineral specimens (exchange). Medler, Dr. John T. : 15 stoneflies, Nigeria. Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada: 20 algae specimens
Milton, Dr. Daniel J. (see Interior, U. S. Department of the). Mineralogisches Museum (through Dr. Gert Wappler) : 11 mineral specimens
Mississippi State University (through Dr. Ronald Altig) : 25 crustaceans. Missouri, University of (through Dr. D. B. Dunn) : 222 plant specimens
Garrit Davidse) : 6 compositae, Panama. Mitchell, Robert W. : 34 planarian slides, types, Mexico. Miyagi, Dr. Ichiro: 17 canaceid flies, Asia. Moe, Dagfinn (see Botanisk Museum). Molinari, Ovidio Garcia (see Puerto Rico, University of). Montgomery, Dr. Arthur (see Lafayette College). Moore, Donald R. : 5 mollusks. Moore, Dr. Harold E., Jr. (see Cornell University). Moore, Dr. Paul B.: 9 mineral specimens, including types. Moore, Phil H. : 7 plant specimens, Guam.
U. S. Department of the). Muchmore, Dr. William B.: 862 centipedes and millipedes. Mumaw, Homer: 1 shrew.
Muniziga, Juan: clay-covered human skull fragment, Chile. Murayama, Dr. Sadao (see National Science Museum). Murdock, Dr. Joseph (see California, University of). Murphy, Dr. D. H. : 30 lace bugs, Asia. Museo Civico de Storia Naturale, Italy (through Dr. Canzoneri) : 3 ephydrid
T. Nakaike) : 50 ferns (exchange). Natur-Museum und Forschungs Institut Senckenberg (through Dr. R. zur
I walkingstick (exchange). Nevling, Dr. Lorin I., Jr. (see Field Museum of Natural History). Newell, Dr. Norman D. : 5,000 marine invertebrates, Tunisia. Newell, Robert L. : 19 stoneflies.
Newman, Dr. Marshall T. (see Ferguson, Mrs. A. L. L.). Newman, Dr. William A. (see Marine Biological Association of the United
Kingdom). Newman, Dr. William A. (see California, University of). New Mexico, University of (through Dr. Klaus Keil) : meteorite specimen
E. W. Valentine) : I sawfly (exchange). Nichols State University (through James G. Ragan) : 6 fish specimens. Nickel, Dr. Ernest H. : mineral specimen, Australia. Nickel, Dr. P. A.: mite slide. Nicolay, Col. S. S.: 4 butterflies, South America. Nielsen, Dr. Jorgen (see Copenhagen, University of). Nielsen, Mogens C. : 9 moths and butterflies. Nikitsky, Dr. N. (see Academia Nauk of USSR). Noble, Chief Dennis L. (see Transportation, U. S. Department of). Nohel, Dr. Peter: 4 beetles.
Norford, Dr. B. S. (see Canada, Government of). North Carolina, State of: Museum of Natural History (through Dr. Roland
Austin B. Williams) : 5 crustaceans. Northeast Louisiana University (through Dr. Neil H. Douglas) : 49 fishes,
British Honduras. Nowacki, Dr. W. : mineral specimen, Switzerland (exchange). Nussbaum, Ronald A.: 31 salamanders. Nutting, W. H.: 255 beetles. Oak Ridge National Laboratories (through Dr. T. F. Connolly) : 6 crystal
David H. Stansbery) : 2 freshwater moUusks. Oklahoma City Zoo (through Charles G. Wilson) : fish specimen. Old, Dr. William E., Jr. (see American Museum of Natural History). Old Dominion College (through Dr. John R. Holsinger) : 354 crustaceans. Oldeman, Dr. R. A. A. (see France, Government of). Oliver, Michael K. (see Occidental College). Olson, Dr. Storrs: 2 rodent specimens. Olsson, Dr. Axel A.: 2 marine mollusks. Oman, Dr. Paul (see Oregon State University). Ontiveros, Manuel: 3 private specimens, Mexico. Opler, Dr. Paul A. (see Organization for Tropical Studies, Inc.). Oregon State University (through Peter A. Bisson) : 20 fishes; (through
Pala Properties International (through William Larsen) : 9 mineral specimens. Palmer, Robert E. : 5 polychaete worms (exchange). Palmer, Dr. William M.: bog turtle, corn snake.
Palomar College (through Dr. Dennis L. Bostic) : 14 worms, 2 mollusks. Panczner, William: natrolite specimen, New Zealand. Paperna, Dr. Ilan (see Virginia Institute of Marine Science). Papua and New Guinea, Territory of: Department of Forests: 644 plant
Parmelee, Dr. David F. : 28 bird skins and 8 skeletons, Antarctic. Parsons, Dr. Carl T. : 2 beetles, Brazil (exchange). Patterson, Dr. Bryan (see Harvard University). Patterson, Mrs. Jefferson; 5 ethnological specimens, West Africa; pottery head,
Uganda. Patton, Mr. and Mrs. Harry J.: rug of Egyptian Bedouin tent cloth. Paul, Dr. Allen Z. (see Florida State University). Paulson, Dr. Dennis : 7 dragonflies.
Texas A&M University). Perrault, Dr. G. G.: ground beetle, type. Peters, Dr. William L.: 382 Neuropteroids (see also Edmunds, Dr.
George F., Jr.). Petersen, Dr. Ole V. (see Mineralogisk-Geologiske Institut), Peterson, Mrs. L. W. (see Smithsonian Institution). Peterson, Norman: 745 mammal specimens, Colombia). Petit, Richard E. : 1 mollusk specimen. Pettitt, Dr. Charles (see Manchester, University of). Peyton, E. L. (see Defense, U.S. Department of). Pflug, Linda: 2 marine mollusks, Venezuela. Philips Forschungslaboratorium Aachen Gmbh (through G. R. Schodder) :
Puerto Rico, University of (through Dr. Paul R. Burkholder) : 7 sponges; (through Dr. J. Maldonado Capriles) : 49 Lepidoptera and Diptera, 574 Hemiptera and Hymenoptera, 22 Neuropteroids, 224 Coleoptera (gift- exchange); (through Ronald J. Larsen) : 18 crayfish; (through Ovidio Garcia Molinari) : 27 botanical specimens.
Rijkmuseum van Natuurlijke Historie, Netherlands (through Dr. C. O. van Regteren Altena) : 2 marine mollusks; (through Dr. Boesman and Dr. B. B. CoUette): 4 fishes; (through Dr. D. C. Geijskes): 37 stoneflies (exchange) ; (through Dr. W. Vervoort) : 84 copepods.
Rijksuniversiteit te Utrecht, Netherlands: Botanisch Museum en Herbarium: 60 botanical specimens (gift-exchanges); 24 plant specimens (exchange); (through Dr. E. A. Mennega) : 30 plant specimens (gift-exchange). Zoologisch Laboratorium (through Dr. H. A. ten Hove) : 15 polychaetes.
Salmons, Cathy (see North Carolina, University of). Saloman, Carl H. (see Commerce, U.S. Department of). Samuel, Mr. and Mrs. Craig R. : 6 fossil invertebrates, Devonian. Samuelson, G. A. (see Bernice P. Bishop Museum). Sanderson, Dr. Milton: 3 beetles. San Diego Society of Natural History (through Dr. George E. Radwin) :
Sawyer, Dr. Roy T.: 213 worms, 66 leeches and many cocoons, 2 crustaceans. Saxon, Dr. James G. (see Erskine College). Scalisi, I. Phillip: mooreite specimen. Schindler, John (see Defense, U.S. Department of). Schlepp, Gene: 2 mineral specimens, Mexico (exchange). Schlicter, Ernest: 68 mineral specimens. Schmidt, Terry E. : meteorite specimen (exchange).
Schneider, Dr. Curt R. : 122 Lepidoptera and Diptera, 12 Neuropteroids, 3 Hemiptera and Hymenoptera, Thailand.
Smithsonian Institution (see the following Funds: Bacon, Canfield, Casey, Chamberlain, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Roebling, Springer, and Walcott) : Collected for the Museum: 99 worms, Margarita Islands, Venezuela, Dr. Meredith L. Jones; 10 echinoderms. Central Pacific, Pacific Ocean Biological Survey Progam; 54 lots worms, 6 marine mollusks, 34 crustaceans, 50 echinoderms, RV Aliminos cruise; 113 crustaceans, Canada; 39 dried reptile skeletons; 2 echinoderms, 4 crustaceans, 1 lot worms, Israel; 129 sipunculids, Yugoslavia; 1,809 crustaceans, 46 Coleoptera; 9 lice slides, Liberia; 12 crustaceans, 10 worms, Argentina, O. L. Flint, Jr., and G. F. Hevel; 6 fishes, Tunisia; 49 reptiles and amphibians, Egypt; 13 crustaceans, Thailand; 13 bird skins, 37 bird skeletons, Western Beaufort
Sea Ecological Cruise Survey; 21 crustaceans, Senegal; 88 crustaceans, Bermuda; 6 crustaceans, 19 mollusks,. Indonesia; 654 fossil mammals, Oligocene, Wyoming; 50 echinoderms, Western Australia Museum; 7 plant specimens, Colombia; 7 mollusk shells, Alabama; 2 crustaceans, Mexico; 2 samples lithium clay. North Carolina; 3 xenoliths, Arizona; 16 worms, 545 crustaceans, 300 mollusks, Yugoslavia and Tunisia; 99 ostracods. Tertiary and Recent; 2,243 plant specimens, Brazil, Dr. Cert Hatschbach; 8,000 silicified brachiopods, Thailand, R. E. Grant and F. G. Stehli; 1,933 plant specimens, Costa Rica, D. B. Lellinger and J. J. White; 26 bird skins, 29 skeletons, 3 nests, 2 eggs, Brazil; 24 crustaceans, 265 mollusks, 11 worms, 27 echinoderms, Turkey; 4 mollusks; 360 mineral specimens, Alaska; 25 freshwater mollusks. New York; 34 marine mollusks; 29 mollusks, Caroline Islands; 1 marine mollusk, 1 echinoderm, 427 crustaceans, Yugoslavia; 1,540 mollusks, 20 crustaceans; 16 mineral specimens, Iceland; 2 mineral specimens, Mexico; 35 bats, 4 rodents; 7 begonias, Ceylon, A. H. M. Jayasuriya; 4,232 crustaceans, RVs Vema, Atlantis II, and Anton Bruun; 2 taafeite specimens, Australia; 1 lot augite crystals, Mt. Etna volcanic complex. Dr. R. F. Fudali; 6 echinoderms, Morocco; 100 corals, mollusks, and burrow structures, Crustaceous, Texas; 1 natrojarosite specimen, Australia; 330 crustaceans, Caspian Sea; 1,900 mollusks, American Samoa and Cook Islands; 26 foraminifera. North Atlantic; meteorite specimen, Australia; 8 potsherds, Brazil; 14 potsherds, Argentina; 700 Oligocene and 6 Pliocene fossil vertebrates, Nebraska and Wyoming, Robert J. Emry; 80 plant specimens, U.S.; 77 centipedes and millipedes. New York; 450 archeological specimens, Nicaragua; 18 Cretaceous corals; painted altar slab, Arizona and 5 etched birchbark plaques, Maine, Dr. Jesse Walter Fewkes; 362 Neutropteroids, 69 Coleoptera, Ohio; 10,493 Lepidoptera and Diptera, 1,651 Coleoptera, 936 neuropteroids, 536 Hemiptera and Hymenoptera, 343 Myriapoda and Arachnida, Dominican Republic and Jamaica; 2,347 neuropteroids, Sri Lanka; collection of archeological objects, Florida; 147 craft objects, Bhutan; 69 ethnological specimens, Angola; 4 felsic volcanic rock specimens, Wyoming; 85 bat flies, Venezuela; 6 oolitic limestone specimens, Australia; 15 neuropteroids, Yugoslavia. Ft. Pierce Bureau (through Dr. Robert M. Gore) : 106 crustaceans, Panama. Found in the Collections: 5 Near Eastern rugs; 195 mineral specimens; 1 peacock coal specimen. Mediterranean Marine Sorting Center: (through Mohamed Lajmi): 6 crustaceans; (through Dr. Ernani G. Menez) : 785 crustaceans, Morocco. National Zoological Park: dwarf lemur, prairie dog; 25 bird skins and skeletons. Oceanographic Sorting Center: 4,781 Nematoda, Antarctica; 431 sipunculids ; 3,824 echinoderms; 2 echinoderms, 2 lots nemertean worms; 335 marine and land mollusks; British Honduras; 60 lots polychaetes; (through Dr. Richard S. Houbrick) : 10 crustaceans; (through Dr. Richard S. Houbrick and Henry A. Jones): 40 marine mollusks; (through Henry A. Jones): 1,746 crustaceans; (through Dr. Leslie W. Knapp) : 32 crustaceans, Thailand; (through Betty J. Landrum) : 220 marine mollusks; (through Dr. Ernani G. Menez): 32 crustaceans, Philippines; (through John Miller): 6 ostracods; (through Mrs. L. W. Peterson): 5,859 crustaceans. Purchased: 28 plant specimens; 227 Tibetan ethnological items; 140 Motilone Indian specimens, Venezuela; sculptured pottery owl. Renwick Gallery: glazed ceramic water jar, Nigeria. Tropical Research Institute (through Dr. Charles Birkeland); 17 crustaceans, Panama; (through Dr. Peter VV. Glynn): 77 crustaceans, Panama; 200 crustaceans; (through James P. Stames) : 202 crustaceans, Panama; (through Dr. Henk Wolda) : 7 plants, Colombia.
Dr. John S. Garth) : 1 crustacean, type, Peru. Southern Illinois University (through Dr. Jamie E. Thomerson) : 4 fishes, types,
Middle Cambrian crinoid. Sprinkle, Dr. James (see Interior, U.S. Department of the). Staiger, Dr. Jon (see Miami, University of). Stames, James P. (see Smithsonian Institution).
Stanford University (through Dr. J. Dearborn): 11 echinoderms, Antarctica. Stansbery, Dr. David H. : 6 freshwater mollusks (see also Ohio State
Arabia; (through Dr. Kyle R. Barbehenn) : 673 mammal specimens. Station de Recherches de Zoologie, Guadeloupe (through Dr. Ch. Leveque) :
Dr. Richard E. Stearns. Steffan, Dr. Wallace B. (see Bernice P. Bishop Museum). Stein, David (see Oregon State University). Stein, Jack: 4 beetles.
Steinhouser, Dr. S. R. : 6 plant specimens. El Salvador. Stephens, J. D.: 15 mineral specimens. Stephens, Dr. John, Jr. : fish specimen, Chile. Stevcic, Dr. Zdravko (see Ruder Boskovic Institute). Stewart, Dr. Kenneth W.: 23 stoneflies. Steyermark, Dr. Julian (see Venezuela, Government of). Steyskal, George C: 707 marsh flies. Stirn, Dr. Jose (see Marine Biological Station). Stock, Dr. Jan H. (see Caribbean Marine Biological Institute). Stockton, William L. : 9 marine mollusks, Antarctica. Stone, Dr. Benjamin C. (see Malaya, University of). Stone, Dr. Margaret H. (see Cornell University).
Williams) : 7 fish specimens, types. Teran, Dr. Luis Ruiz (see Universidad de los Andes). Terborgh, Dr. John W. (see Weske, Dr. John S.). Texas, University of: Austin Campus (through Dr. Thomas W. Broadhead) :
James R. Reddell) : 39 crustaceans, Mexico. T.F.H. Publications, Inc. (through Dr. Herbert R. Axelrod) : fish specimen, Brazil. Thomas, Dr. Maurice (see Tulane University). Thomerson, Dr. Jamie E. (see Southern Illinois University). Thompson, Dr. Peter R.: 6 foraminifera. Pleistocene. Thongtham, Suwannawat: Marine mollusk, Thailand. Thorington, Dr. Richard W.: 4 anole lizards; 58 rodent skeletal material;
Tillett, Dr. Stephen S. (see Venezuela, Government of). Titeux, M. Roger: fluorite. Trance. Tkac, Martin A., Jr.: 261 flies. Todd, Dr. E. L.: 1,434 mof/zs. Todd, Dr. Neil B. (see Faunalabs, Inc.). Togashi, Dr. Ichiji: 8 sawflies, types, Japan. Tokyo, University of, Japan (through Hiroyoshi Ohashi) : 147 botanical
Dennis L. Noble) : 8 skeletons and 1 skin, Arctic birds. Traub, Dr. Robert: 66 fleas, including types. Treasury, U.S. Department of the: Bureau of Customs: 2 Chinese scrolls; 15
Tressler, Christopher: Recent attached foraminifera. Trjapitzin, Dr. V. A. (see Academy of Sciences of the USSR). Tropical Science Center, Costa Rica (through Dr. Leslie R. Holdridge) :
Tseng, Wen-young (see Taiwan Fisheries Research Institute). Tsuji, Dr. Fred (see Pittsburgh, University of). Tucker, John M. (see California, University of). Tulane University (through Dr. Maurice E. Thomas): 3 bats; (through
Dr. Emily M. Yokes) : 7 mollusks. Tunnell, John W. : 15 worms, Mexico. Tuskegee Institute (through Dr. James D. Williams): 25 crayfish; 35 fishes,
Villalobos F.) : 81 crayfish. Universidad Nacional de Colombia (through Dr. Plutarco Cala and Dr. B. B.
Ferreyra) : 132 plant specimens Universidade de Brasilia, Brazil (through Dr. George Eiten) : 14 Cramineae
Sob.) : 62 plant specimens. Universitat Kiel (through Dr. Gerhard F. Lutze) : 53 foraminifera, Persian
Uttal, Dr. Leonard J. (see Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University). Vail, J. R. (see Khartoum, University of). Valencia, Dr. Luis: 4 Tachinid flies, Peru. Valentine, E. W. (see New Zealand, Government of). Valenza, Mr. and Mrs. Angelo D. (see Gaeth, Mr. and Mrs. Douglas E.). Vails, Dr. J. (see Universidade Federal de Rio Grande do Sul). Vanderbilt University: Herbarium (through Dr. Robert Krai): 476 plant
Bermudez) : 2 lizards. Vervoort, Dr. W. (see Rijksmuseum van Natuurlijke Historie). Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand (through Dr. Anthony A.
Villalobos, Dr. Carlos R. (see Universidad de Costa Rica). Villalobos F., Dr. Alejandro (see Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico). Vince, Louis: 5 antlerite specimens. Virgin Islands Ecological Research Station, St. John (through W. N. Brownell) :
A. MacCord and Arthur F. JoTinson) : 13 human burial remains. Virginia Institute of Marine Science (through Dr. Donald F. Boesch) : 33
Wallace, Dr. George: 3 unique-headed bugs (see also Carnegie Museum). Waller, Dr. Thomas R. : mollusk specimen. Wallmark, Dr. John A.: 93 mites, including types. Walls, Jerry G.: 7 cebrionid beetles. Walter, E. V. (see Bruce-Terminix Co.). Walton, Col. Frank E.: Chinese opium smoking outfit.
Wappler, Dr. Gert (see Mineralogisches Museum and Universitat zu Berlin). Ward, Dr. David B. (see Florida, University of). Waren, Dr. Anders (see Gothenburg, University of). Warner, William W. (see Lee, Lester). Wasbauer, Dr. Marius S.: 2 Leiomyrmosa spilota, types. Washington, University of (through Kenneth K. Chew) : 1,000 crustaceans,
Aleutian Islands; 20 starfish, Amchitka. Watkins, Marjorie (see Duke University). Watling, Dr. Les (see Delaware, University of). Watson, Dr. Joan (see Manchester, University of). Wauer, Roland H. (see Interior, U.S. Department of the). Weber, Dr. William A. (see Colorado, University of). Weibezahn, Franz H.: 519 caddisflies, Venezuela. Welsh, Dr. Stanley (see Brigham Young University). Wentz, Mrs. James E.: basketry hat, Philippine Islands. Werneke, Dr. Robert M. (see Arthur Rylan Institute for Environmental
Weske, Dr. John 5., and Terborgh, Dr. John W.: 211 bird skeletons. West Coast Plankton Studies (through Dr. DeBoyd L. Smith) : 100 medusae. Westcott, Richard L. : 3 beetles. Western Airlines (through Henry M. deButts) : Chilkat Indian totem pole,
H. J. Anderson:) I lot uraninite crystals. Wharton, Dr. Charles H. (see Georgia State University). Wheeler, Dr. A. G. (see Pennsylvania, State of). White, Larry: 2 quartz specimens.
Whitehead, Dr. Donald: 12 rove beetles. Central America. Whitmore, Dr. Frank C: 16 marine mollusks, Mexico. Wible, Marion: 2 spears, Burma. Widener, Millard E.: 37 fossil specimens, Devonian. Wielgus, Ronald S.: 40 Lepidoptera larva; 65 Lepidoptera and Diptera, 38
Coleoptera. Wiewandt, Thomas A.: 2 crustaceans, Puerto Rico. Wiggins, Dr. G. B. (see Canada, Government of). Wight, Quintin: 2 mineral specimens, Canada.
Philippine Islands, in memory of Mrs. Dorothy Webb Wilcox. Wilkey, Richard F. : I Coccoidea slide. Williams, Dr. Austin B. (see Commerce, U.S. Department of, and North
Carolina, University of). Williams, Dr. Douglas J. (see Commonwealth Institute of Entomology). Williams, Dr. James D. (see Tennessee, University of, and Tuskegee Institute). Williams, Mrs. Maxcine: 21 plant specimens, Alaska. Williams, Prosper J.: 2 mineral specimens (exchange). Williams, Dr. Sidney A.: heyite specimen, type. Williams, Dr. T. Walley: 4 marine mollusks. Wilson, Dr. Barry R. (see Western Australian Museum). Wilson, Charles G. (see Oklahoma City Zoo). Wilson, Dr. Donald E. (see Interior, U.S. Department of the). Windsor Metalcrystals, Inc. (through Dr. Robert B. Pond, Jr.) : single
Wolfe, Dr. Lauren G. (see Rush-Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical Center). Wolff, Dr. Torben (see Universitetets Zoologiske Museum). Wood, Roy D.: jonesite specimen. Wood, Dr. Stephen L.: 4 Coleoptera. Woodring, Dr. J. P.: 23 mite slides, Central America. Woodruff, Dr. Robert E.: 31 beetles. Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (through Dr. David C. Judkins) : 130
G. Reeder) : 2 Cramineae specimens, Mexico. Yale University: Peabody Museum of Natural History (through Dr. Willard D.
Hartman) : 9 sponges, types. West Indies. Yancey, Thomas (see Malaya, University of). Yang, Julie C. (see Johns-Manville Corp.). Yedlin, Neal: I lot and 4 mineral specimens. Yepez, Dr. F. Fernandez: 13 neotrjopical Coleoptera. Yochelson, Ellis L. (see Interior, U.S. Department of the). Young, Dr. Allen M. (see Laurence University). Young, Dr. Frank N. : 479 water beetles. Young, Jack R. (see Lyko Mineral and Gem, Inc.).
Department of). Zarco, Antonio: 22 Choco Indian specimens, Panama. Zibrowius, Dr. Helmut: 10 echinoderms, 6 crustaceans, 342 worms. Zo, Zinntae: 30 mollusks; 13 crustaceans. Zur Strassen, Dr. R. (see Natur-Museum and Forschungs Institut
Bengal monitor. Mr. Jim Crews: ratsnake. Mr. David DeAnna: common iguana. T. M. Duckworth: reticulated python. Mr. Tom Cause: common iguana. Mr. John Gorden: boa constrictor;
Mr. Michael Majhew: chuckwalla. Lawrence Murphy: desert monitor. National Park Services: 4 copperheads. Mr. Clyde Peeling: timber rattlesnake. Mr. John Pratt: copperhead. G. M. Watson: copperhead.
Mary Carothers. Mrs. George De Lys A. L. Diament and Co. Mr. Samuel J. Dornsife Fieldcrest Mills, Inc. Mr. Milton Fischer Mr. M. Roy Fisher Mr. Harold L. Frank Friends of Textiles Fund,
Cooper-Hewitt Museum Mrs. Petersen Gilbert Dr. Mattiebelle Gittinger Mrs. Margaret N. Godlove Mr. Thomas Golodik Grosvenor Gallery (London, England) Mr. Richard V. Hare Mrs. Norris Harkness Mrs. Pascal R. Harrower Mrs. Francis Head. See Lydia
Bush-Brown. Miss Elizabeth G. Holahan D.M.C. Hopping Miss Josephine Howell Mr. Lloyd Hyde Jack Lenor Larsen, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. Russell D. Ketcham,
R.I.) Mr. Donald B. Palmer The Peale Museum (Baltimore, Md.) Mrs. Harry T. Peters Ms. Mary Walker Phillips Miss Elizabeth Riley Mrs. Gregg Ring Mr. Carl Ritorno Rohi (Munich, Germany) The Estate of Alice Royce Mrs. David Russell San Francisco Victoriana F. Schumacher and Co. Mrs. Alma Selkirk The Estate of Mrs. Margaret Sloss Society for the Preservation of Long
Island, N.Y.) Mr. Milton Sonday Ms. Marguerite V. Sutton Mr. Dalmar Tifft United States Secretariat (International
Learned Societies The Annenberg Fund, Inc. The Paul A. Bissinger Foundation Mr. William McCormick Blair, Jr. Mr. R. C Blue Frances and Sidney Brody, Charitable
Fund, Inc. Brotherton-DiGiorgio Corporation The Honorable David K. E. Bruce Mrs. W. Randolph Burgess Mrs. Anna Chennault General Claire Lee Chennault
Mr. and Mrs. Edward T. Chow Mr. and Mrs. Raymond E. Cox John M. Crawford, Jr. Mrs. John Dimick Mr. and Mrs. Peter F. Drucker The Edipa Foundation, Inc. Mrs. Ruth Epstein Mr. and Mrs. David E. Finley Mrs. George A. Garrett Mrs. Katharine Graham Mr. and Mrs. Charles A. Greenfield Mary Livingstone Griggs, and Mary
Griggs Burke Foundation Mr. John W. Gruber Mr. Felix Guggenheim Mr. and Mrs. N. Vadim Hammer Mr. John K. Havemeyer International Rectifier Corporation
Foundation Mrs. Chisholm Lindsey Mrs. Elizabeth Lorentz Mayuyama and Company Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer
Foundation, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. Harry C. Nail Northrop Corporation Mr. and Mrs. William Paley Mr. Jefferson Patterson Mr. Armistead Peter, 3rd Dr. and Mrs. Irving Philips Dr. and Mrs. John A. Pope Price Foundation, Inc. Mary Taylor and Walter S. Robertson
Trust Mr. and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller, 3rd The Honorable Nelson A. Rockefeller Mr. and Mrs. Carl W. Stern Mrs. L. Corrin Strong Mr. John S. Thacher Miss Helen Vorvolakis Chi-chuan Wang Weatherhead Foundation Ellen Bayard Weedon Foundation Woodheath Foundation
Keystone Shipping Company Kidder Peabody Foundation Kominers, Fort, Schlefer & Boyer The Lykes Foundation, Inc. Maritime Overseas Corporation Mr. and Mrs. John Mayer Moore-McCormack Lines, Inc. National Steel & Shipbuilding Co. Propeller Club, Port of New York Shipbuilders Council of America Todd Shipyards, Inc. United Seamen's Service
Day covers. Anderson, Mrs. Will: pair pillow cases and sheet, early 19th century. Andrews, Harris: 1922 Poll Tax certificate, cover page of sheet music;
Armstrong, 1857. Arnhold, Henry: Meissen service, ca. 1740. Arnhold, Henry; Hawes, Dr. Lloyd E.; and Syz, Dr. Hans: / Meissen plate,
Beaux-Art (through Jacques Lavalleye) : silver commemorative medal. Belinky, Mrs. Michael R.: man's sweater, ca. 1929. Benedict, Larry: 140 orange and grapefruit labels. Bennett, Barbara: Meissen plate, ca. 1850-1900. Bennett, Mrs. Wilda P.: 4 lady's caps, 2 ribbons, sampler. Benzinger, Mr. and Mrs. Hugo (see Strach, Marion Babette). Berkebile, Don H. : 6 historical transportation items; miner's hammer. Bernstein, Herbert: 3 souvenir covers; 3 First Day covers. Bewley, E. J.: post-office lockbox.
Josephine Dubs Bohart. Bolduc, Hector L. : 2 U.S. coiners. Bolte, Mrs. Vernon A. (through Warren Danzanbaker) : mourning band,
Huber) : steam traction engine, 1924. Brock, Mrs. Pearletta (through Mrs. Herbert Foley) : land grant, 1856. Brooks, Phil: book The Art of Diplomacy. Brooks, Philip C. : 2 specimens relating to funeral of President Harry S.
Truman; white linen damask tablecloth. Brown, Edgar (see Newell, Mr. and Mrs. Sterling). Brown, Mr. and Mrs. Gerald: copper weathervane. Brown, Monnie: 2 coverlets, quilt. Brown, Pearl G.: 2 preserve jars. Bugbee, Mrs. Joan: 326 surgical instruments, 567 books and pamphlets, 18
Numismatists). Burnnell, John F. (see Chrysler Corporation). Burnside, Mr. and Mrs. Thomas (see Daguerreian Era). Burundi, Government of: Agency Philatelique: 4 First Day covers, commercial
Maurice: vacuum cleaner. Callanan, William F. : first flight cover. Calloway, Mrs. Mary: miner's pick, lamp, and cap, in memory of Ira
Clevenger, Mrs. Alice: baby's spoon, hunting and fishing license. Coe, Mr. and Mrs. Arthur P.: 73 pieces of "slag" glass, late 19th century. Coffee, Barbara J.: "Election Day in Kentucky" postcard, 1913; political
Waldman and Jack Kuney) : documentary film "How Women Cot the Vote." Commerce, U.S. Department of: 9 physical science specimens. Conger, Clement (see White House). Conger, Mrs. Frederic (through Dr. Richard H. Howland and Anne Denton
Cunningham touring car, 1929. Gupp, Mrs. Donald E. : knitting sampler. Curtis, Col. James W.: silver medal. Daguerreian Era (through Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Burnside) : albumen print of
Smithsonian Institution, late 19th century. Damm, Mrs. George R. : 2 service records, 3 photographs. The Danbury Mint: 2 mounted medals. Danzenbaker, Warren (see Bolte, Mrs. Vernon A.). Davis, Dr. Sidney L. : mourning letter and 2 franked envelopes, 1901,
Research Laboratory (through Mrs. Baster) : IBM. keyboard punch. de Gil, Beatriz Pantoja (see Colombia, Government of). Democratic National Committee: 52 political campaign items. Denmark,Government of. Ministry of Public Works (through T. W. Madsen) :
Duncan, Mrs. Candy (see Washington Area Convention and Visitors Bureau). Dunham, Dr. Richard Brown: spinning wheel, ca. 1840-1900. Dunn, Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Wallace, Jr.: silver ash tray, 6 pieces silver
Engelbach, Mr. and Mrs. Miles V.: 273 stamps, covers, and postal specimens. Evans, Dr. Clifford, and Meggers, Dr. Betty: 12 First Day covers, 22 mint and
Freeman, Michael A.: photograph of President Harding's funeral, commemo- rative plaque of President Johnson's Korean visit. Friedland, Dr. Fritz: pair of wooden crutches. Friends of Music at the Smithsonian Fund, Smithsonian Institution:
Heath, Robert R. (see Carlisle Colonial Minute Men). Hebert, Raymond J.: brooch, necklace. Hebert, Mr. and Mrs. Raymond J. : 86 financial documents, 48 coins, 25
Henke, Mrs. Nancy W. (see White, Walter Rhoads, Children of). Hergert, Gustav A. : 9 specimens from the Civilian Conservation Corps,
Howland, Dr. Richard H. : footstool, 19th century; 2 dresses, 2 women's neckwear, ca. 1910 (see also Conger, Mrs. Frederic).
Klopsteg, Dr. Paul E. : 253 bows, arrows, and associated gear. Kompare, Anton: painted egg, Taro cards. Korrow, Martin M.: 4 commemorative plates. Kramer, Mrs. Howard D. : woman's wrap, ca. 1916. Kuhler, Otto: 31 etchings.
Kuney, Jack (see Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc.). Kuper, Theodore Fred (see Macondray, Mrs. Atherton). LaBarge, Inc. (through R. F. Mohrman) : voicebak prosthesis. Lake, Dorothy O. (see Oviatt, Ruth A.). Lake, Edmond: newspaper, 1828; newspaper reprint, 1800. Land Transportation Fund, Smithsonian Institution: 6 railroad conductor's
Equal Rights Amendment poster and bracelet. Leavitt, Mrs. Lena C: patent model of jobbing press. Lechleitner, Katherine M.: 525 naval history items. Lederer, Howard A.: 697 Warren G. Harding memorial stamps. Lehde, Mrs. Pendleton E. : quilt top, crib cover. Leigh, Mr. and Mrs. James C. : 1,318 currency notes. Lemeshka, W. Dan (see the Gorham Co.). Lenhoff, James W. : specially cacheted commemorative cover. Lennan, Mrs. Bryant: sword and scabbard, 1850. Lenox, Inc. (through Robert J. Sullivan) : annual issue plate "Woodland
Wildlife"; limited edition plate, 1973. Lepman, Dr. Harry, Estate of: broadside announcing antilynching rally
Ludington, Morris H.: 4 sheets of forged postage stamps. Luginbuhl, Mrs. Edna: wooden souvenir postcard, 1904. MacCloskey, Gen. Monro: saber, scabbard, sword knot, and cover. Mace, Carl D.: trap gun, 9 swords and scabbards. Mack, Allan: rail bender, wrench, drill rack with sets, spike bar. Mack, Mrs. Marion: document signed by Calvin Coolidge, 1926. Mack, Wilfred A.: book New Practical Arithmetic, 1877. Macondray, Mrs. Atherton, and Children (through Theodore Fred Kuper) :
Middleton, Mrs. Yevonde (through Dr. Spencer) : 3 color photographs. Miles, Mrs. Alice M.: stereographic card; barbed wire fence stretcher. Miller, Mrs. Caroline Benes: 8 cultural history specimens. Miller, J. Jefferson, II: basket and stand, ca. 1810. Miller, Dr. John V.: stamped envelope. Miller, Hon. Midge: 11 political campaign items. Mohrman, R. F. (see LaBarge, Inc.).
Parade." National Commemorative Society: 4 silver commemorative medals. National Museum of Transport (through Dr. John P. Roberts) : horse-drawn
New Zealand, Government of: 22 mint postage stamps. Newell, Ben A., and Tumbull, Jack: sheep shears. Newell, Mr. and Mrs. Sterling: Jacquard double-woven coverlet, in memory of
Orsinger, Dr. William H. : 11 medical science specimens. Ortman, Mrs. Elizabeth: sheet music, badge, chevron, medal. Oviatt, Ruth A., and Lake, Mrs. Dorothy O.: coverlet, crocheted curtains.
Harry S. Chidakel. Patterson, Mrs. Jefferson: 4 items of apparel, reducing device. Paul, Gabe (see New York Yankees). Petersilia, Martin J. A.: 24 anti-Vietnam War specimens. Petersilia, Patricia, and Egan, Peggy: 9 specimens concerning Concert for
Peace, 1973. Peyton, Bernard: 20 postage stamps. Phillips, Mr. and Mrs. Lionel: glazed dish, 1973. Pineau, Capt. Roger: 7 commercially used postal covers. Pinnell, Beth: commemorative medal.
Ripley, Dr. S. Dillon: commemorative medal (see also Bradley, Frederick). Robertine, Sister (see St. Peter's School). Roberts, Dr. John P. (see National Museum of Transport). Robinson, Edwin K. : belt buckle, framed r>erse, greeting cards, postcard;
Rowe-Craig, Mrs. Isabel (see St. Margaret's Church Sewing Group). Ruckelshaus, Hon. William D.: gold commemorative bowl. Rudin, Eli H. and Miriam; Altman, Mrs. Belle Rudin and Maybelle;
Harold E., Jr.). Schafer, Chester A. (see Polonus Philatelic Society). Schallert, Mrs. Ruth F. (see Smithsonian Institution). Schiffman, Edward Gottlieb: porcelain dish, ca. 1735. Schilt, Mrs. Leon (see Katz, Mrs. Pessa Kaufman). Schoen, Mrs. Edwin A.: silk quilt.
Schorr, Sam (see Vietnam Veterans Against the War). Schroeter, John C. (see Brandt, Mrs. Amos, and Sons). Schumacher, Byron E. (see McCormick, Bill and Glenna).
Sendel-Iturbide, Jorge: calendar and descriptive sheet. Setto, Melvyn (see Oleg Cassini, Inc.) Shafer, Mrs. Betty Lou: /effer Wflfefi Marc/j 29, 1776. Shank, Dr. Russell (see Smithsonian Institution). Shapiro, Sanford (see Treasury, U.S. Department of the). Shattuck, Mrs. Anna P.: 2 volumes Arctic Explorations, 1856; 3 photographs. Shaver Elsie, documents and objects relating to the career of Dorothy Shaver,
Collected: book State of New York, a Memorial to Theodore Roosevelt. 1919 ; satirical briefcase on Watergate; 2 seals used at 1973 Inaugural Ball Found in the Collections: 201 political specimens; 11 photography specimens; 3 engineering specimens; collection of fire extinguishers, helmets, sprinklers, harness, fire and locomotive patent models; bull tethering ball; 15 textile specimens. Libraries: organization chart of French Government, 1775; (through Dr. Russell Shank) : 318 postage stamps. Museum Shops (through William Rowan) : 309 postage stamps and covers. National Air and Space Museum (through Frederick C. Durant III) : 7 fabric samples. National Museum of Natural History: Department of Botany (through Mrs. Ruth F. Schallert) : I cover with one-cent stamp, 1875. Oceanographic Sorting Center (through Dr. H. A. Fehlman) : 17 pieces receiving equipment. Productivity Hall: 2 firemen's helmets. Purchased: glass case bottle, 1788; tower clock; star atlas, 1835 ; cash register; lithograph of mission; chair from U.S. Senate; 4 wooden kitchen boxes;
Smythe, Mrs. George W. : woman's dress and purse, 1922. Snider, Charles S.: 15 political campaign specimens. Snow, Robert R. (see Treasury, U.S. Department of the). Societe Commemorative de Femmes Celebres: 3 silver medals.
Turner, Mina: portrait of Thomas Edison by Charles Fox, 35 photographs. Tweedy, Mrs. Marjorie Alice Loud: 2 ballpoint pens, fountain marker, and
White, John H., Jr.: streetcar controller handle. White, Lt. Robert LeAlan: 295 political campaign items. White, Walter Rhoads, Children of (through Mrs. Nancy W. Henke) : man's
Dr. Mary E. Walker. Winter, Frank H. : 2 political campaign broadsides. Witze, Claude: commemorative embroidery. Women's City Club: addressograph machine. Wood, Mrs. John S.: 3 shepherd's flutes. Wylie, Donald P.: woman's coat, 1900-24. Wynyard, Dr. Martin: 19 porcelain pieces, 18th century. Wyss, Mrs. Herman: cheese press and curd break. Yeatman, Mrs. Philip W.: scales, weight. Yerich, Albert: sausage stuff er.
Workshop Francisco Albert William Alexander E. Tuckerman Allen Mrs. Frederick Allen Family of James E. Allen Syed Abdul Barq Alvi, through the
United Kingdom Emily Dorothy Ammann Stell Andersen Larz Anderson Mr. and Mrs. Larz Anderson Stanley Anderson Mrs. Walter Anderson Mrs. Eliphalet Eraser Andrews Mrs. George L. Andrews Stephen Andrews Philinda Rand Anglemyer Nathan Appleton Margaretta A. Archambault Mrs. Frances Gray Archipenko
Workshop David Aronson Lila Oliver Asher Associated American Artists Atelier Mourlot, Ltd. Mrs. Charles H. Babcock Alice Baber Walter Bachrach Mrs. Grosvenor Backus William Spencer Bagdatopoulos Lucy Hunter Baird Bryant Baker Stanley Bard The Barnard Family Alice Pike Barney Memorial Lending
Barney Paul Wayland Bartlett Mrs. Paul Wayland Bartlett Charles Baskerville Leonard Baskin Jane Fowler Bassett Mr. and Mrs. Harry Baum The Lionel and Sylvia Bauman
Foundation Mr. and Mrs. John Baxter Truxton Beale Charles Beaman C. Ronald Bechtle Walter Beck Florence Becker Florence Deakins Becker
Mr. and Mrs. Nathan L Bijur Mrs. Nathan L Bijur Mrs. Francis Bitter Mr. and Mrs. Robert A. Blackford Doris Lee Blanch Lucile Blanch The Blk Group Eleanor Blodgett Frances E. Blum Mrs. Frances E. Blum George Blundell Leslie Bokor Eugene W. Boiling Solon H. Borglum Sculpture Fund Mrs. Alfred Bornmann Massimo Bottecchia, through the
Venice Workshop Mrs. Henry Dupre Bounetheau Mary O. Bowditch Mrs. Albert G. Brackett Brandeis Women of Washington, D.C. Mr. and Mrs. Warren Brandt Mrs. Adelyn D. Breeskin Brigham Young University The British Memorial Committee Romaine Brooks Dr. and Mrs. Jack H. U. Brown Phyllis A. Brown Mrs. Byron Browne Mrs. Chester Browne Alexandrina Bruce Ernest R. Bryan Robert Budd Virginia Bullock-Willis Mrs. Harry N. Burgess Mrs. Charles Burlingham Bernard N. Burnstine Edmund Bury Dr. Martin H. Bush
Foundation Alexander Calder Harold Callender Dr. Carmichael Edith Coon Carr Edgar M. Carrothers, Jr. Mrs. John B. Chadwick Nannie and Emily Tevis Chase Chicago Society of Etchers Sargent B. Child
Chilean Embassy, Washington, D.C. Yuen-Yuey Chinn Mrs. Nigel Cholmeley-Jones Mme A. Langley Ciocca Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Wright Citron Constance Claghorn Mrs. Joseph C. Claghorn Mercie Tarbell Clay Mary Louisa Adams Clement Robert Clements Henry Clews and Committee of
Subscribers Douglas Climenson William Baxter Palmer Closson Mrs. William Baxter Palmer Closson Mrs. Griffith Baily Coale Estate of Dr. Doris M. Cochran Mrs. B. 5. Cole Albert Coifs Mme Veuve A. Collin Susanna Claxton Collins Committee of the Western U.S.
Paintings Bernard H. Cone Mrs. Frank Cummings Cook Mrs. Carleton S. Coon Lila Copeland Mrs. Edward Corbett Thomas Corinth Mrs. Ralph T. K. Cornwall Thomas L. Costaggini Mr. and Mrs. Harold Courlander Daniel Cowin Allyn Cox
Mrs. Charles R. Crane Dr. and Mrs. John Crane Josephine Crane Foundation Katherine N. Crapster Bessie B. Croffut Frederick W. Cron Robert Cronbach Howard Page Cross Page Cross
Estate of John Chandler Davis Monica B. Davis and Paul Borglum Mrs. Stuart Davis Mrs. Manierre Dawson Mrs. Anthony De Francisci Jean De Marco Mrs. Griffin De Mauduit John Watts DePeyster Milliard Dean Senor Nieto Del Rio Joseph Delaney Reverend F. Ward Denys Michael J. Deutch Mrs. John H. Devine Mr. and Mrs. Morse Grant Dial Nickolai V. Dimitrieff Charles Dipple Richard Ball Dodson Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Dorsky John E. Dowell, Jr., through the
Venice Workshop Juan Downey Downtown Gallery Werner Drewes Victoria Dreyfus Mr. and Mrs. Arthur P. Drury Dr. and Mrs. Seymour Dubroff Dr. Anna Bartsch Dunne David E. Dykaar Moses Wainer Dykaar Mary Houston Eddy Basil Ede
Mrs. Martin O. Elmberg Andre Emmerich Gallery, Inc. Emmet Statue Committee Jules Engel George L. Erion Mr. and Mrs. Jimmy Ernst Mrs. Francisco Ertl Relative of James Pollard Espy Essex Institute Minnie Evans William T. Evans Connors Everts Mrs. A. Snowdon Fahnestock
Estate of Lyonel Feininger Mr. and Mrs. Carl Feiss Mr. and Mrs. Henry Feiwel Samson and Sadie B. Feldman Lucie Louise Fery Mrs. James M. Fetherolf Mrs. James M. Fetherolf, Sr. Dr. Bennett Finler Ennst G. Fischer, etc. Elizabeth Fisher Bella and Sol Fishko Harrington Fitzgerald Richard Florsheim Ford Motor Company Forum Gallery Michael Fossick, through the
Negro Arts and History Mrs. E. Martin Buyck Freund Rose Fried Gallery Gordon D. Friedlander Mrs. John Mason Frier Aline Fruhauf Sue Fuller
Dr. Arthur F. Furman Annita B. Gaburri Miss E. C. Gallaudet Mr. and Mrs. Paul E. Garber Adelaide Morris Gardner Mrs. Fred Gardner The Misses M. E. and W. S. Gatchell Mrs. W. H. Gatchell Robert F. Gates Gerald K. Geerlings Charlotte Geffken Franz G. Geierhaas John Gellatly Thomas George Mrs. Thomas George Allan Gerdau Mrs. H. H. Germain Eugenie Gershoy Professor and Mrs. Leo Gershoy Muzaffar A. Ghaffar, through the
Mr. and Mrs. Ira Glackens Edward Glannon Charles C. Glover Charles C. Glover, Jr. William Goers, through the Venice
Lucy Goldthwaite and Richard Wallach Mr. and Mrs. Mac Kenzie Gordon Dr. and Mrs. Christopher A. Graf Dorothy Grafly Mrs. James E. D. Graham and
Thomas E. Dashill Liliana Gramberg Graphics International, Ltd. Cleve Gray Eric F. Green Mrs. Norvin H. Green Colin Greenly Katharine Gregory Dr. and Mrs. William K. Griffith William Cropper Chaim Gross Chaim and Renee Gross Karl H. Gruppe Gulgee through the
Pakistani Workshop Jennie Anita Guy Arthur Hale Mrs. Airel Hall Edith Gregor Halpert William F. Halsall Frank B. Hand Frank B. Hand, Jr. William Mouat Hannay Mahmud Haque, through the
Pakistani Workshop Estate of James S. Harlan Mrs. James S. Harlan Estate of Mrs. James S. Harlan Dr. R. Harlan Harmon Foundation Lily Harmon Mrs. Fletcher Harper Mrs. E. H. Harriman Sarah Harrison Grace Hartigan
Robert Curtis James Edwin Janss, Jr. Bertha E. Jaques Paul Jenkins Ralph Cross Johnson Mrs. Ralph Cross Johnson S. C. Johnson and Son, Inc. William Cost Johnson Edith Newlands Johnston Harriet Lane Johnston Thomas Hudson Jones Neil M. Judd
Cassie Mason Myers Julian-James Mr. and Mrs. Ira Julian Orrin Wickersham June Ahmed Kahn, through the Pakistani
Workshop Jacob Kainen Ruth Kainen Max Kalish Mrs. Louis D. Kaplan Mrs. David Karrick Donald Karsham Donald H. Karshaw Mr. and Mrs. Harry Katz Hilda Katz William Katzenbach Austin I. Kelly, HI The Kelvinator Company Edward Kemeys May S. Kennedy Kyman Kipp and the Junior
Mrs. Frank Cohen Kirk Henry H. Kitson Minnie Klavans Harris J. Klein Dr. R. A. Kling Mr. and Mrs. Vernon Koenig Ida R. Kohlmeyer Sacha Kolin Mrs. Eugene Kormendi David Kosakoff Doris Barsky Kreindler Harry E. Kreindler Cornelia E. Kremer Murray Kupferman Mr. and Mrs. David H. Kushner Mary La Follette
Workshop Estate of John Holmes Maghee Mrs. Pearl G. Manigault Paul Manship Charlotte Manzari Irving Marantz Bernard Marcus Michael and Caryl Marsh Keith Martin Maurice Massaro Merritt Mauzey
Foundation Fisk Mills Henry L. Milmore Mrs. Henry L. r4ilmore Jeannette Minturn Bashir Mirza, through the Pakistani
Workshop Bruce Moore N. Holmes Morison Mrs. N. Holmes Morison Ira Morris Maud Burr Morris Edward L. Morse
Mr. and Mrs. James M. Mundis Helen Munroe Stefan Munsing James Oliver Murdock Museum of Art and History, Geneva Mrs. Frances E. Musgrove Ghulam Mustafa, through the
Pakistani Workshop Mrs. Frank H. Myers Countess Giovanni Naselli The National Art Committee The National Institute Dr. and Mrs. Frederick P. Nause Alicia Neathery Samuel Neel
Workshop Dr. William B. Ober Mr. J. F. Oertel Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Oken Mr. and Mrs. Frederic E. Ossorio Francis H. Packer Estate of John Wells Paine Nora Panzer and Jody Wight William Franklin Paris Betty Parsons William Decatur Parsons Mrs. William O. Partridge Edward H. Pattison Peabody Institute Reverend Charles Russell Peck Alfred Duane Pell The Pell Collection Goree M. and Duffy Pellen, Florence
Philip Morris Corporation Duncan Philips Mr. and Mrs. Oscar Piagentini George Picken Mr. and Mrs. Jozef Pielage Elizabeth Pilling Dr. Gifford B. Pinchot Mrs. James Pinchot Mrs. Roger Plowden Henry Varnum Poor Dr. Fortunato Porotti Barent George and Florence
Workshop Mr. Jean S. Redd Alex S. Redein Mrs. Francis T. Redwood Mary Buchanan Redwood Henry M. Reed Mrs. Irina A. Reed Paul Reed Anton Refregier Joseph Renier Republic of France B. C. Reynolds George Rickey Caroline Hunter Rimmer Mrs. Frank Roberts Mrs. Albert J. Robertson Persis Weaver Robertson Maria Fassett Robinson Hugo Robus, Jr. Mrs. Edward Pearson Rodman John Rogers Umberto Romano Dr. Benjamin Rones Roosevelt Newsboys' Association Kermit Roosevelt Mrs. C. H. Roper Elise Rosen James N. Rosenberg Pearl Tofel Rosenblum Mrs. Bernard Rosenthal Theodore Roszak Herbert and Nannette Rothschild
Dr. and Mrs. James Rudel Mrs. J. Wright Rumbough Eugene A. Rumsey Mr. and Mrs. Benjamin Rush Alexander Russo Carl F. Sahlin
Colonel Harrison K. Sayen H. Lyman Sayen Bertha Schaefer Mae Schaettle Mary L. Schaff Louis Schanker Steven R. Schiffman Mrs. Joseph Schillinger Charles K. Schlachel Arthur Y. Schulson Mrs. Alfred Schuster Adrienne Schwartz Mr. and Mrs. Eugene Schwartz Dr. David W. Scott Edith Scott Mrs. Robert J. Service Darryl Sewell Seymour Graphics Neshan G. Shamigian Mrs. Robert F. Shanan Herman Shark, through the Venice
Workshop Mrs. Henry D. Sharpe Charles Shaw Flora E. H. Shawan Elizabeth Shefer Drs. Ben and A. Jess Shenson Mrs. Richard Sheridan Frederick Fairchild Sherman P. Tecumseh Sherman Mrs. Walter Shirlaw Elizabeth Shoumatoff Mary B. C. Shuman Benjamin Silliman, II David Simpson Mrs. John Sloan George Vander Sluis Edmund Hodgson Smart Elenor Hewitt Smith Mr. J. H. Smith James Smithson Frances Smyth Jacob Snyder, Jr. Society of Washington Printmakers
Workshop Elizabeth Kendall Underwood Mrs. Pierson Underwood Mrs. Ralph Underwood The United States Line Richard Upton Sara Carr Upton Mrs. Eugene Vail Mrs. John M. Van de Water Mrs. E. N. Vanderpoel Mrs. George Viault Romas Viesulas, through the Venice
Workshop Mrs. Joseph S. Wade Dorothy Wagstaff Theodore Wahl Charles Doolittle Walcott Hudson D. Walker John Alan Walker Emile Walters Mrs. Benjamin H. Warder Dwight Wardlaw The Washington Print Club Mrs. Ernest W. Watson Mrs. Forbes Watson Nan Watson George Frederick Watts Mrs. Sidney Biehler Waugh Dr. and Mrs. Paul Weaver Mrs. Nicholas Webster William Weege, through the Venice
Workshop Wesley Wehr Jean Weinbaum Mrs. Howard Weingrow Mrs. Adolph A. Weinman Adolph Alexander Weinman Dr. and Mrs. Jacob Weinstein Joseph Douglass Weiss Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Douglass Weiss Mrs. Joseph Douglass Weiss Lee Weiss
Pepi Weislgartner-Neutra Mrs. Stow Wengenroth Florence Adele Wetmore E. Weyhe, Inc. Jang Har Whang Ellen R. Wheeler Mary Ursula Whitlock Anne Whitney
NOTE: The Botany Branch Library is the beneficiary of the Catherine Beauregard Archer fund bequeathed by the late Dr. Wm. Andrew Archer who died in May 1973. The income from the investment of the fund is to be used for the library in a variety of ways, depending on need, such as binding, purchasing books, supplies and equipment, or matching funds for employing a technician for a special project.
It is appropriate these days to attempt to guess what amount of growth is prudent in an organization. In the United States growth and development have been synonymous with "good" for lo these many years. "Growth" stocks, corporate "growth/' "growth" in- dustry — all have been phrases on the side of the angels. And indeed growth is natural, a symbol of animate being. "Growth is the only evidence of life," as a Dr. Scott said to Cardinal Newman a cen- tury or so ago.
Another area in which our collections have strength is in the history of porcelain-making in Europe. Oriental hard-paste por- celains were greatly admired in the West, but it was not until the early eighteenth century, under the aegis of Augustus the Strong, Elector of Saxony, that hard-paste porcelain was successfully pro- duced in Europe at Augustus's Meissen factory. Through the benefactions of a few donors, notably Dr. Hans Syz, our Museum of History and Technology possesses an important collection of European hard-paste porcelains as well as a fascinating exhibit of many Oriental prototypes in design and pattern.
This past year has included several important appointments. Mr. Stephen Weil has come to us from the Whitney Museum of Ameri- can Art in New York to assume the post of Deputy Director of the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden. Dr. James Billington has become Director of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars after a trial year's leave from Princeton. Dr. Forrest C. Pogue was appointed Director of the Eisenhower Institute for His- torical Research in the National Museum of History and Tech- nology. Mr. Lawrence Laybourne has joined the Smithsonian as Coordinator, Office of Membership and Development, after work- ing as a Vice President for Government Affairs of Time Incorpor- ated for a number of years in Washington. Mr. Howard Toy has come to us as Director of Personnel from the Office of Economic Opportunity. We are honored and pleased with these significant additions to our staff, and honored also that Francis 5. L. William- son, Director of the Smithsonian's Chesapeake Bay Center for Environmental Studies, has taken a year's leave of absence to serve as Commissioner of Public Health and Social Services in the Cabinet of Governor Jay S. Hammond in the state of Alaska.
Two retirements after many years' service of particular im- portance this year were those of Dr. George S. Switzer and Mr. Jeremiah Collins. Dr. Switzer was in the Department of Geology from 1948, and in the Department of Mineral Sciences from 1963, and Chairman of that Department from 1968 until his retirement. Mr. Collins has retired after nineteen years of service with the Smithsonian's International Exchange Service during seventeen of which he was head of that Service, which each year on behalf of the Library of Congress and government agencies ships many tons of published works from the United States to libraries abroad.
Death claimed several of our men in the Smithsonian service in- cluding the untimely loss of Mr. L. Wardlaw Hamilton of the Gen- eral Counsel's office in a motor accident and Mr. Jesse E. Merida, a museum specialist in geology, of a heart attack. Howard I. Chapelle, an internationally known marine historian and author, who was Historian of Marine Architecture on the staff of the Na- tional Museum of History and Technology until 1971, died on June 30, 1975. He had been a prominent member of the Smith- sonian staff since 1957.
Our labors would be incomplete without the many gifts which the Institution has received over the year in funds or in kind. The principal acquisition during the year has been the formal decision by Mr. Bern Dibner to transfer to us his extraordinary library and collection of artifacts in the history of science. This collection has been referred to elsewhere in our annual report of this year and last, but it helps to place our departmental work in the history of science and technology in a new context. I could say with some confidence, primus inter pares.
At the Fall Meeting of September 24, 1974, the Board welcomed Dr. Gell-Mann as a recently appointed Regent. It was noted with great satisfaction that Mr. Burden and Dr. Haskins had been re- appointed, by acts of Congress.
The Board accepted with pleasure the gift of Mr. Bern Dibner consisting of the major resources of the Dibner Library of the His- tory of Science and Technology.
On the basis of an historical review of some six years of ocean- ographic research based at Fort Pierce, Florida, the Secretary pro- posed and the Regents agreed to a review for future guidance of the corporate and program relationship with the donors, J. Seward Johnson and Edwin A. Link. A Smithsonian ad hoc committee com- prising several Regents and members of the Smithsonian's Board of National Associates was proposed. Mr. Johnson and Mr. Link concurred.
Mr. John Nicholas Brown, Chairman of the National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board, reviewed for the Regents the long
The Regents were given further status reports on construction projects at the National Air and Space Museum, the National Zoo- logical Park, and the Arts and Industries Building, and accepted with great pleasure the gift of Mr. William A. M. Burden of ballooning artifacts, including books and furniture with a ballooning motif.
A motion was adopted to designate the education building at the Chesapeake Bay Center as the Jean C. Schmidt Environmental Education Building in honor of Miss Schmidt's development of an environmental awareness program before her untimely death.
The Regents received the report from the ad hoc committee on Fort Pierce, Florida. The study included a tour of the facilities and talks by members of the scientific staff. The principal programs are the Indian River Study, the Life Histories Studies, and the Submarine Exploration of the East Florida Continental Shelf. These and other research programs were considered by the Smithsonian staff to be worthwhile and should be continued. Dr. Murray Gell- Mann of the review committee concluded in its report that the present arrangements for accomplishing the scientific objectives at Fort Pierce should be continued on substantially the same lines, with a yearly review of objectives. The Regents approved.
From left to right: Mrs. John Nicholas Brown, Secretary and Mrs. S. Dillon Ripley, and the Honorable John Nicholas Brown, Regent and Chairman of the National Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board, Smithsonian Institution, in the Great Hall, Smithsonian Institution Building, evening of May 14, 1975, at the conclusion of a reception and dinner given by the Board of Regents and the NAFMAB in Mr. Brown's honor, on the occasion of the dedication of the Dwight D. Eisenhower Institute for Historical Research. The Board of Regents bestowed the Henry Medal on Mr. Brown on this occasion.
The Secretary called attention to the comprehensive appraisal by Dr. Crawford Greenewalt of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (stri) in Panama, circulated to the Board.
Mr. Goheen stated that he would like to know periodically the progress of the Institution in equal employment opportunity. The Secretary referred to a report which was given to the Regents on the Civil Service Commission's survey of 1973.
The Regents then joined their wives and guests for a reception and dinner honoring Dr. John Nicholas Brown on the occasion of the dedication of the Dwight D. Eisenhower Institute for Historical Research, at which Dr. Caryl Haskins presented the Henry Medal to Regent John Nicholas Brown for his devoted service to the In- stitution and the Nation.
Endowment income provided the major operating support for the Freer Gallery of Art and the Fort Pierce Bureau, with the re- mainder of the endowment funds (outlined below) benefiting projects throughout the Institution. The gifts and grants to the Institution are far too numerous to describe fully, although a partial listing of donors follows this report. Their support to the restricted funds, however, provided the greater portion of the operating budgets of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum of Decorative Arts and Design and Hillwood, the former estate of Mrs. Marjorie Merriweather Post. Major support was provided to the National Air and Space Museum by gifts from the Summa Corporation for general exhibits purposes and from the German Federal Republic for construction and equipping of its new Spacearium; these gifts are of immense value to the Institution in its commitment to open this museum on July 4, 1976. Another Bicentennial project which received important funding was the Division of Performing Arts
Foundation CBS Foundation, Inc. Charron Foundation Continental Grain Company Mrs. David Craven Crowley Maritime Corporation Doubleday & Company, Inc. The Henry L. and Grace Doherty
Foundation, Inc. Mr. Vasco McCoy, Jr. State of Mississippi Mobil Oil Corporation National Geographic Society New York State Council on the Arts Edward John Noble Foundation
Mr. and Mrs. David Packard Pepsi Cola Company Foundation, Inc. Phelps-Dodge Corporation Marjorie Merriweather Post
Miss Amelia E. Anthony Arthur-Smith Corporation Ashland Oil, Inc. AVCO Corporation The Barra Foundation, Inc. Mrs. Frederic C. Bartlett The Bass Foundation Bath Iron Works Corporation Battelle Laboratories The Bedminster Fund, Inc. Beneficial Foundation Bethlehem Steel Corporation Miss Helen Bissell Dr. and Mrs. Arthur Bloom Mrs. Beulah Boyd Mr. Daniel J. Boorstin The Boswell Oil Company
Foundation Sumner Gerard Foundation The Gilman Foundation Gladders Barge Line, Inc. Mr. Alfred C. J. Glassell, Jr. Josephine Graf Foundation Mr. and Mrs. Rudolph F. Greiser Mr. Chaim Gross Mr. M. D. Guiness Hallmark Educational Foundation Mrs. Anne B. Harrison Mr. and Mrs. John Davis Hatch Mrs. Enid A. Haupt The Hecht Company Mr. Henry J. Heinz II Mr. C. Heurich, Jr. Mr. Louis W. Hill, Jr. Hiram Walker & Sons, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. James Stewart Hooker Imperial Embassy of Iran The Institute for Intercultural
Preservation Pan American Section Mr. James E. Jarnagin Mr. and Mrs. C. S. Justman Edgar J. Kaufmann Charitable
Foundation Mrs. Harold J. Kersten Samuel H. Kress Foundation Mrs. Morris A. Levy Mr. Harold F. Linder The Link Foundation Mrs. Kathleen S. Louchheim S. C. Loveland, Co., Inc. Mrs. Percy C. Madeira, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Edward P. Maffitt
Maritime Overseas Corporation Mr. Lawrence K. Marshall Mr. and Mrs. William A. Marsteller Chauncey and Marion Deering
McCormick Foundation Honorable and Mrs. George McGhee McGraw Hill, Inc. Mrs. Nancy M. McNeil Mr. Robert L. McNeil, Jr. Merck & Company Mrs. Margaret Carnegie Miller Mrs. Irene Morden National Bank of Detroit National Steel & Shipbuilding
Company Newport News Shipbuilding Olin Corporation Charitable Trust Mr. and Mrs. Dan Oppenheimer Optimus Productions Ltd. PACCAR Foundation J. C. Penney Company, Inc. James C. Penney Foundation, Inc. Philip Morris Incorporated The Pioneer Foundation, Inc. Propeller Club, Port of New York Mr. and Mrs. William L. Richards Anne S. Richardson Fund Josephine C. Robinson Foundation Estate of Berenice Schwieder Security Storage Company of
Washington Misses Elsie and Dorothy Shaver Mr. and Mrs. Alger Shelden Shipbuilders Council of America The Sidney Printing and Publishing
Company Mr. Charles Simons Mrs. Frances F. Smith Mr. and Mrs. James K. Smith Standard Oil Company of California Mrs. Shirley Watkins Stein Mr. and Mrs. Mark Stevens The Symonds Foundation Tauber Oil Company Mr. and Mrs. Bertrand L. Taylor III Time Incorporated Trust Company of Georgia
Union Mechling Corporation University of Michigan University of Washington Walco National Corporation Mr. Richard W. Weatherhead Ellen Bayard Weedon Foundation Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Weinstein Mr. Royce S. Weisenberger, Jr. Westinghouse Electric Corporation
WGBH Public Broadcasting, Boston Ms. Gail D. Wilson Woodward and Lothrop, Inc. Woolworth and Woolco Stores Worthington Sales Company Charles W. Wright Foundation of
Conference of N.A.L.V. Mr. and Mrs. W. T. Gillham Mr. Herbert R. Glaser Reverend and Mrs. C. Leslie Glenn Mr. Frederick R. Goff The B. F. Goodrich Company Mr. and Mrs. William A. Gordon Mr. Gilbert Greenway Mr. and Mrs. T. R. Grosvenor Mr. and Mrs. William A. Henry Mrs. Maxine Harrison Estate of Calvin Hathaway Mr. and Mrs. Curtis L. Hillyer Mr. and Mrs. Albert G. Hoffman Mr. and Mrs. Hugh H. Honnen Mr. and Mrs. Samuel G. Houghton Miss Dora Ide
Mr. and Mrs. Frank N. Ikard Irving One Wall Street Mr. and Mrs. Joseph D. Isaacson Mr. William Jamison Mr. and Mrs. B. F. Jones Atwater Kent Foundation, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. Morris Ketchum Mr. and Mrs. Edward F. Knight Mr. and Mrs. Peter Knowles Mr. and Mrs. Paul Laurenson Mr. and Mrs. Owen S. Lindsay Mr. and Mrs. Martin L. Loftus James A. MacDonald Foundation Mr. and Mrs. John P. Mackinnon Mrs. Frances D. Martyn Maxon Marine Industries, Inc. Mr. Donald Mayer
The work of the Research Institute on Immigration and Ethnic Studies for the fiscal year 1975 involved a wide-range of activi- ties: special lectures and participation in professional meetings on ethnicity and immigration; publications in professional journals; supervision of graduate fellows in ethnic studies; and rendering consultation services to other sectors of the Smithsonian Institution. Under the directorship of Roy S. Bryce-Laporte, a comparative sociologist, RiiES obtained internal support for a bicentennial project on new immigration to the United States. The project being coordi- nated by Ms. Dolores Mortimer takes the form of a series of seminars on various aspects of the new immigration which will culminate in a national conference and publication. Various con- sultation visits and advisory seminars in Washington, D.C., Cali- fornia, Florida, and the Virgin Islands, have been carried out by RUES staff and it has contracted for data surveys on special immi- grant populations. Lecture presentations by the Director of rues were made at Howard University, the Caribbean Studies Associa- tion, and the International Studies Association.
With Mr. John Marshall, world-famous anthropological filmer of the Kalahari Bushmen, the Center has begun assembling and annotating his film record, the most extensive ever made of a tradi- tional hunting-gathering society, and preparing research films for deposit in the National Anthropological Film Center.
With the cooperation of Dr. Norman Miller, Director of the American Universities Field Staff Film Project, the Center has now accessioned 126,800 feet of research filmed material of human adaptation in three modernizing cultures: a Tadjik-Pashtoon-Uzbek agricultural village in northern Afghanistan, a highlands Aymara subsistence agricultural community in Bolivia, and a cattle-herding Boran nomadic group in Kenya. The Afghanistan footage has already been annotated by anthropologist Dr. Louis Dupree. The others are now being prepared for annotation. The Center cele- brated its formal opening with premier showings of several educa- tional films prepared by the American Universities Field Staff from this research filmed material.
As part of the Study of Child Behavior and Human Development in Cultural Isolates and with the support of the Instituto Nacional Indigenista of Mexico, the Center is proceeding with a long-term film study of traditional Huichol Indian life in the San Andres region of Mexico. Dr. Kalman Muller, an anthropological filmmaker now resident in this region, has been participating as chief ethno- cinematographer.
With Dr. William Crocker of the Department of Anthropology, the Center is collaborating in a research film study of child behavior and human development among the relatively unacculturated Canela Indians of Brazil.
In collaboration with Dr. Kalman Muller, the research film study of remaining surviving traditional Melanesian cultural groups in the New Hebrides Islands is continuing. This footage is now being prepared as annotated research films at the Center.
In January 1975, Dr. Francis S. L. Williamson, after six years as Director of the Chesapeake Bay Center for Environmental Studies, resigned to accept an appointment as Commissioner of Health and Social Service for the state of Alaska. Dr. J. Kevin Sullivan assumed the position of Acting Director.
Dr. Williamson and his colleagues conceived of the Rhode River Program, which is the core of the Center's research effort. This project is a study of the interaction of the Rhode River estuary with its watershed and man's impact on this system. The comple- tion during fiscal year 1975 of a full year of monitoring material entering the estuary from land runoff and other non-point sources and the initiation of a Forest Ecology Program are steps toward understanding how man's use of land affects this ecosystem. The Forest Ecology Program is part of the Smithsonian's Environmental Sciences Program (esp).
The non-point sources study is funded by nsf-rann (National Science Foundation-Research Applied to National Needs) through the Chesapeake Research Consortium. It is the most extensive study of its kind currently underway on an estuarine system in the United States. Investigators from the University of Maryland and the Johns Hopkins University are working with Smithsonian scientists on this project. Dr. David Correll is coordinating the Rhode River Research Program.
Facing page, below: With the aid of sweepnets and plastic bags, students are exploring the variety of insects and spiders that live in a forest com- munity. This field activity was developed by Dr. John Falk, cbces Education Director, as part of the obis (Outdoor Biology Instructional Strategies) Pro- gram. It is one of many obis activities which are designed to promote the understanding of ecological relationships by youngsters from eleven to fifteen years of age.
The Center's full-time staff numbered approximately forty-five at the close of the fiscal year. Over one-half of these employees are private employees. Additions to the permanent federal staff in- cluded Dr. James Lynch, zoologist, and Mr. Gary Chirlen, bio- logical systems analyst.
The major research project of the year was related to the ApoUo- Soyuz Test Project (astp). Dr. Farouk El-Baz, Research Director of the Center for Earth and Planetary Studies, is Principal Investigator for "Earth Observations and Photography" on this mission. His research team is comprised of thirty-four experts in the fields of geology, oceanography, desert study, hydrology, meteorology, and environmental studies. The purpose of the experiment is to use the capabilities of the trained astronauts in obtaining scientific data while in Earth orbit.
As a member of the Task Group on Lunar Nomenclature of the International Astronomical Union, Dr. El-Baz is responsible for
Dr. Farouk El-Baz made a trip to India and the Middle East to lecture on "Scientific Findings of the Apollo Missions" and "Earth Observations and Photography on ASTP."
While in Egypt, he conferred with officials of the Academy of Scientific Research and the Ministry of Higher Education and Scien- tific Research concerning a joint project with the Smithsonian. This project will deal with the "Geological Characteristics of the Deserts of Egypt" and will be based at the Geology Department of the University of Ain Shams in Cairo. During the ten-day visit. Dr. El-Baz was received by President Anwar Sadat, who encouraged the project and emphasized the importance of scientific research in
President Anwar Sadat of Egypt examines the feature named Al-Qahira Vallis (Cairo Valley) on a globe of Mars presented him by Dr. Farouk El-Baz during a recent visit. The name Al-Qahira Vallis was recommended by El-Baz to the International Astronomical Union because the city of Cairo was originally named after the planet Mars.
Looking over the foundation work for the National Museum of Natural History's new west courtyard addition were (left to right) Dr. Porter Kier, NMNH Director; Richard O. Griesel, Smithsonian's Business Management Office Manager; Richard W. Kernan, Group Vice President of the Marriott Corporation; Ames T. Wheeler, Treasurer of the Smithsonian; Paul N. Perrot, Smithsonian's Assistant Secretary for Museum Programs; and James F. Mello, NMNH Assistant Director.
A group of children watch Mrs. Isabell Deschinny (right), a Navaho from Houck, Arizona, and the daughter of a world-famous weaver, give demonstrations during April at the National Museum of Natural History. She is being assisted by docent Fran O'Leary. This is the first in a series of nmnh Office of Education demonstrations a that show traditional ways in which items in the museum's exhibitions were used. I
The prehistory of the Labrador coast was long obscured by a be- wildering melange of Indian and Eskimo archeological remains that defied clarification. But now the National Museum of Natural His- tory's Dr. William W. Fitzhugh has worked out a framework for 7000 years of that region's prehistory. He believes that to under- stand its shifting cultural patterns one must take into account strong environmental influences that overrode other events.
Dr. Fitzhugh's first few years of Labrador field work testing this hypothesis focused on an area along the central coast. The results were published in Environmental Archeology and Cultural Systems in Hamilton Inlet, Labrador. During the past two years he has shifted his attention northward.
Dr. William Fitzhugh at work excavating a two-family Dorset Eskimo (ca. a. d. 400) semi-subterranean winter house in northern Labrador. Below: Dr. Fitzhugh holding Indian and Eskimo artifacts up to a map to show where they were found in Labrador.
Dr. Fitzhugh says that there is evidence that this drastic caribou- Indian population collapse — which we know occurred in both the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries — was a fairly common occurrence in the prehistory of the Labrador-Quebec peninsula. The consequence for the famine stricken Indians was often cultural extinction. Eventually the caribou herds would reestablish, Indian hunters would drift upward into Labrador from Quebec, and a cul- ture would form and the cycle would repeat itself.
The Himba are a pastoral cattle-keeping people that live in a harsh and remote mountainous area of Angola and South West Africa. Dr. Gordon D. Gibson, the National Museum of Natural History's specialist on African ethnology, is studying the life of these people. Demographic information is one part of this life but it is not easily accessible because the Himba, like most preliterate peoples, do not count the years of their lives or the years passed since critical events. Their time chronology is based on important events or "epochs" in the region in which they live. Thus, if an investigator asks a Himba when he was born, he might reply that it was during the epoch of the locust invasion as readily as we would reply to the same question with a numerical year, like 1923.
Dr. Gibson found that drought and famine, which are common to southwestern Angola and South West Africa, are the events most frequently memorialized in epoch names. Seasons of plentiful rain are also recalled, as well as pestilences (animal rather than human), plagues of insects and vermin, wars, problems brought by administration, magicians, problems (other than wars) concerning relations with other tribes, acculturative changes, deaths of impor- tant people, and the abundance of certain wild fruits.
Most adult Himbas that Dr. Gibson questioned were able to pro- vide a sequence of epoch names relating to specific events in their region, but before a number of these could be combined into a
Dr. Gordon Gibson holding an exannple of the hair ornament shown in the enlarged photograph next to him. Below: Dr. Gibson interviews some of the Himba people.
Dr. Gibson found that persons from the same area who claim to be able to recite the names of the years in continuous order gen- erally do not agree completely, either in the order they give them or the names of the year included. Names often differed from place to place also, some having widespread usage while others were very localized; and there were many synonyms as well as some homon- ymous year names among the more than 300 epochal names Dr. Gibson collected.
In spite of these problems. Dr. Gibson was eventually able to come up with a well-supported sequence for his master list of epochs. By consulting archival sources he then documented several of the epochs in the list, so that "tie points" to the Christian years are not separated by more than about five years. With this list he can determine with a good degree of approximation Himba indi- viduals' current ages and their ages at life crises — data important for certain kinds of sociological research.
In September 1974, Dr. Edward S. Ayensu, Chairman of the National Museum of Natural History's Botany Department, con- vened an international meeting of botanists and administrators at American Horticultural Society headquarters. Mount Vernon, Virginia. He was acting in accordance with Congress' 1973 En- dangered Species Act, which requested that the Secretary of the Smithsonian, in conjunction with other affected organizations, begin reviewing the species of plants which are now or may become endangered or threatened and methods of adequately conserving such species.
Attending the meeting were representatives of the Departments of Interior and Agriculture, Council on Environmental Quality, National Science Foundation, Nature Conservancy, and a number of universities and botanical gardens. Foreign representatives were also present, including Dr. J. K. Morton of Canada, chairman of the committee on Rare and Endangered Species in the Canadian Flora, and Grenville Lucas, Royal Botanic Gardens, England, Threatened Plant Committee, Secretary, International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources.
Nine recommendations, compiled under Dr. Ayensu's super- vision, were subsequently submitted to Congress in a report by Secretary Ripley. Sent to Congress with the recommendations was a list of about 750 endangered and 1200 threatened plants in the mainland United States. A separate list of over 1000 endangered or threatened kinds for Hawaii was also included. These species, either very rare or with local or limited distribution, are subject to threats, or are heavily depleted by destruction of habitats or by commercial or private collectors.
Dr. Joan W. Nowicke, whose speciality is the study of pollen grains, is part of an international group which is gathering scien- tific data on one of the most unusual and controversial groups of flowering plants, the Order Centrospermae. This Order has at least 10,000 species distributed among eleven families including the cactus, pokeweed, four-o'clock, cockscomb, and carnation families and several others. Studies have shown that nine of this Order's eleven families have a unique red pigment, the nitrogen-containing betacyanins which substitute for the anthocyanin pigments found in other flowering plants.
Part of the controversy is over whether the two families without betacyanins should be included in this Order. In examining the pollen grains of more than 200 species Dr. Nowicke has found that the vast majority of the grains in the betacyanin families and the
Dr. Erwin's field observations at the Smithsonian Tropical Re- search Institute's (stri) Barro Colorado Island have given him evi- dence that ground beetles moved from tropical wetlands — the "boil- ing pot" for their evolution — in an ecological progression from the wetlands onto the forest floor, then into the forest undercanopy, and finally upward into the treetops. He has pioneered in tracing the specialized tropical life cycles developed by the beetles on the forest floor and undercanopy and plans future work at stri and elsewhere that will eventually take him on eighty-foot-high cat- walks so that he can study life in the treetops. There is an urgency to this project because when the forests are cut, as is happening in Latin America, hundreds of these forest top species are irretrievably lost.
The National Museum of Natural History has a half-million ground beetles in its collections, making it probably second in size only to the British Museum. When Dr. Erwin came to nmnh in 1971 he found these collections poorly organized because no ground beetle specialist had ever been employed at the Museum before. He has since sorted all of these specimens to tribe level, and many to generic and species level. The wealth of data available in the col- lections and the opportunity to work at stri launched him into a massive systematic study of the ground beetles of Central America.
All of the natural history and geographical information on each species is being computerized by Dr. Erwin's wife La Verne, who is a full partner in the project and will co-author the six-volume study. Heretofore, projects one-third this size have taken from twenty-five to thirty years but computerization will enable them to finish it in a fourth of the time.
At the National Museum of Natural History a great deal of interest in Ascension Island's invertebrate animals has been stimu- lated by a field trip made there in 1971 by Dr. Raymond B. Man- ning, a specialist in decapods (an order of crustaceans that includes shrimps, lobsters, and crabs). Like earlier scientists, he was inter- ested in Ascension's land crabs. But casting his net over a wider area, he took the opportunity to make an intensive survey of the marine life in the Island's lava tidal pools and shallow shore waters.
An example of the Island's puzzling fauna, collected by Dr. Manning in two tidal pools on the western edge of the Island, were two unusual shrimps, one unique in being clawless and lack- ing sexual modifications. In the report on the two shrimps, written
Clawless Shrimp Procaris ascensionis. x7. Drawing by Dr. Fenner Chase. Dr. Raymond Manning examines an Ascension crab.
Glomar Challenger. Below. Dr. William Melson and colleague. Dr. Fabrizio Aumento, examining core samples aboard Glomar Challenger.
Drs. Manning and Chace are now engaged in completing their study of the more than forty other species of decapods collected by Dr. Manning on Ascension, based on samples taken from a variety of shallow-water habitats there. Dr. Joseph Rosewater has recently published a survey of the Ascension mollusks collected by Dr. Manning^ >ln Annotated List of the Marine Mollusks of Ascen- sion Island, South Atlantic Ocean, and Dr. David L. Pawson is studying the echinoderms Dr. Manning brought back. The deep- water fauna off Ascension remains poorly known.
Dr. Melson was cruise co-chief scientist with Dr. Fabrizio Aumento of Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. Assisted by information provided by the thirteen other scientists comprising the international crew, they made such critical decisions as the exact location of the drill sites.
In late January 1975 in the cattle ranching country of northern Queensland, Australia, paleobotanist Dr. Francis Hueber pried out of a low sandstone ledge the fossilized remains of a 360-million- year-old Devonian plant. It was the best preserved specimen found of this Devonian genus and for Dr. Hueber it was a major stride forward on a project that began seventeen years ago.
It was nine years before Dr. Hueber was able to get to Australia. When he did it was to collect fossil material in the State of Victoria connected with research he was doing on other Devonian plants. But he took the opportunity to go north for a few days and locate the site on the Fanning River. In Devonian times the area appar- ently had been a great river delta near the ocean^and trees and other plants had floated down river and sunk into the delta sands and muds. Dr. Hueber hastily surveyed the area's sandstone formations and was encouraged when he found more scraps of the fossil. The material that he was able to collect turned out to be rather poorly preserved but revealed the fact that the plant instead of being herbaceous of habit was in truth a tree. But another problem arose — were the star-shaped strands of wood the tree's roots or branches? The anatomy of the trunk was of a complex nature and did not give clear evidence for orientation of the specimens. Therefore, which way was up?
In 1970, Dr. Hueber returned to northern Queensland after Don Wyatt, an Australian geologist, wrote that high water in the Fan- ning River area had cleared a mudstone layer in which two masses of the fossilized tree he was looking for were exposed. The geolo- gist had interpreted the fossils as the tops of the trees with their branches spread out through the matrix. Dr. Hueber collected a considerable amount of the fossil material but when he got it back to the Museum found it useless in solving the problem. The tree fragments had so badly rotted before fossihzation that it was im- possible to determine clearly the orientation of the specimens.
It was on his third trip in 1975 that Dr. Hueber and Don Wyatt discovered the key 8-inch by 11- inch chunk of log weathering out of the sandstone ledge. Though it has not yet been cut into sections at the Museum and studied. Dr. Hueber is reasonably certain that the anatomy of the specimen is intact and that the orientation of the specimen indicates that the star-shaped strands are the tree's roots.
Facing page, above: Dr. Francis Hueber at work in his office. Facing page, below: The fossilized remains of a 360-million-year-old Devonian plant pried out of a sand- stone ledge in Australia by Dr. Hueber. Above: Site of Dr. Hueber's study of Devonian plant fossils near the Fanning River, Queensland, Australia.
Dr. Richard Thorington continued his studies on troops of howler monkeys on Barro Colorado Island at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. The monkeys usually can be located by their strong smell and noisy chorus. A troop's eighteen monkeys move slowly along through the treetops, feeding on the fruit of fig and hog plum trees and roaring and howling at any stranger who dares invade their territorial area.
Many studies of the social behavior of the Barro Colorado howl- ers have been made, dating back to the work of Dr. C. R. Carpenter in the 1930s, but Dr. Thorington is the first scientist to undertake a study of their long-term population dynamics and the factors that influence it.
The project has already yielded interesting information. Chromo- some analysis of tissue cultures sent to Dr. Ma and Dr. Jones at Harvard's New England Regional Primate Research Center, shows that there is an odd translocation of a Y chromosome in the male howler over to one of the (nonsex bearing) autosomes. This gives the female 54 chromosomes to the male's 53; and the patterning of footprints, fingerprints, and tailprints of the Barro Colorado howlers and those of Costa Rica have been found to be curiously different. Dr. Thorington and Dr. Jefferey Froehlich (at that time, a postdoctoral student) are studying this patterning to see if there is any basic genetic difference in the two monkey populations.
One of the howler monkeys in a troupe on Barro Colorado Island studied by Dr. Richard Thorington. Below: Dr. Thorington measuring the circumference of one of the trees where the howler monkeys feed. Such data is used in the study which correlates productivity of the forest with fluctuations in the monkey population.
Most of Dr. Thorington's findings will come in over a much longer term because howler monkeys live for a long time, perhaps twenty years. Gradually he is documenting life spans, death rates, and the frequency of births to different aged females.
By marking and mapping the trees in the forest that the monkeys use — and studying the trees' flowering, fruiting, and leafing cycles — Dr. Thorington hopes to obtain indices of the annual produc- tivity of the forest and find what impact its fluctuations have on the monkey population.
But there are gradual inexorable changes occurring in the mon- keys' habitat. Botanists who have examined the Island's fig and hog plum trees for Dr. Thorington have noted that the trees do not seem to be producing seedlings, which leads him to believe that the main food supply of the howlers is going to become less and less abundant in the years ahead.
Yellow fever has the potential of causing a swift and devastating impact on the monkey population. Dr. Thorington in collaboration with the Middle American Research Unit (maru) has been able to establish that howlers do not have antibodies to this disease. In 1949, the last time yellow fever swept through the Central Ameri- can forests, it killed up to 75 percent of the Island's monkeys. Since then the Island howler population has increased from 250 in 1951 to 800 in 1959 and in the last eight years has risen to 1500. But in 1974-1975 yellow fever cases have been reported again in the forest, spreading toward the Canal Zone, and Dr. Thorington is afraid that an epidemic could strike Barro Colorado Island.
Since the Zoo has changed its contracting practices to one of direct contracting rather than, as formerly, through the General Services Administration, the workload has increased tremendously. The Zoo was fortunate in having Mr. Robert C. Engle join the staff as engineer and Mr. Fred Barwick as Zoo contracting officer.
On June 22, 1975, the General Services Administration transferred some 3100 acres of magnificent fields, forest, pasture, springs, and farm structures to the Smithsonian Institution, thus making official and legal the Zoo's tenancy at the old cavalry remount station at Front Royal. Previously, the Zoo had been occupying and develop- ing this area under a use permit. Dr. Christen M. Wemmer, who joined the Zoo staff from the Brookfield Zoo in Chicago, heads up the Center ably and is enthusiastically assisted by fifteen employees, some of whom were previously state or federal agricultural em- ployees and are continuing their long careers at the site. Together they have established successful farming, maintenance, and animal management programs. Last year two large pastures were enclosed and one of the old horse barns refurbished. This year two addi- tional horse barns were refurbished and four more large pastures were enclosed. Now in residence are Felds deer, bongo, kangaroo, zebra (two foals born), bactrian camels, rheas, as well as the scimi- tar horn oryx and Pere David deer which were established last year. In cooperation and conjunction with the newly formed Minne- sota State Zoological Garden at MinneapoUs, eight bactrian camels were secured and are now in residence at the Center. Maria, our female bactrian camel, returned to us from Cleveland bringing her consort, Jimmy. Early this spring one of the new females produced a lovely, if somewhat grotesque, calf.
Dr. D. Kleiman planned a facility at one of the barns' in the cen- tral part of the Center's campus for a comparative canid behavior study. The cages for maned wolves, bush dogs, and crab-eating foxes have been constructed and presently two pairs of maned wolves are in residence and under study. These animals were
The Office of Animal Management^ under general curator Jaren Horsley, is continuing efforts to enrich contributions to animal- keeping and to broaden representation in the ranks with the hiring of ten women animal-keepers. Curatorial involvement in animal- exhibit planning resulted in excellent cage furnishing of the monkey house. Research activities increased in the office with two papers given by animal-keepers at professional meetings and with the addition to the staff of a herpetologist. Dr. Dale Marcellini, who will develop the research programs based on the collection.
The year for the Office of Zoological Research has been most pro- ductive. Previous programs and studies have continued with some major additions. In the fall of 1974, final plans were made with Venezuelan scientists to inaugurate a program of field studies in vertebrate behavior and ecology in conjunction with Venezuelan researchers and students. Dr. G. G. Montgomery visited Venezuela
Dr. Devra Kleiman of the research staff has started a study in the communications and reproduction behavior of South American canids. This animal group provides a variety of social organization (e.g., the maned wolf is a solitary animal, the crab-eating foxes live in pairs, and the third individual to be studied, the bush dog, lives in family groups or small packs); a difference in physical size; and a separation in geography. Cage facilities have been con- structed at the Front Royal Conservation and Research Center and two pairs of maned wolves are now in residence and under study.
Dr. Eugene Morton joined the Office of Zoological Research this past fiscal year as staff ornithologist. Dr. Morton has previously worked at Smithsonian facilities in Panama and the Chesapeake Bay Center on behavior and vocalization of avifauna. Currently, Dr. Morton is working in Venezuela and at Front Royal, where he has initiated studies on bluebirds and turkey vultures.
W. P. Dittus received his Ph.D. in August 1974 on work done in Sri Lanka on the tocque macque. Dr. Dittus, at that time a mem- ber of the research department staff, is presently continuing his work in Sri Lanka under the auspices of the Max Planck Institute.
In May 1975, Dr. Montgomery chaired a conference on arboreal- folivore at Front Royal. The conference gathered together thirty international scientists to discuss the impact of vertebrate and invertebrate feeding on the leaves of the tropical forest and the co-evolution of animals and plants in the tropical forest. The pro-
OFFICE OF ANIMAL HEALTH AND PATHOLOGY Work in this department has continued with daily treatment and disease investigation throughout the Zoo. Studies described in last year's annual report have continued. Dr. Robert M. Sauer resigned as pathologist and has been replaced by Dr. R. Montali, from Johns Hopkins University.
Of interest was the initiation of a cooperative study with Dr. U. S. Seal, of the Veterans Hospital in Minneapolis, on contraceptive techniques in lions and other cats. Dr. Gray and Dr. Bush have participated in this project, most of the work being done at the Lion Country Safari at Doswell, Virginia. The study will continue for the next several years.
A veterinary intern position was established. This will be a fif- teen-month appointment with the purpose of giving practical clinical experience to young veterinarian graduates wishing to specialize in exotic animal medicine. Dr. P. K. Ensley has been appointed to fill the first internship.
In spring 1975, a new asteroid discovered by two members of this division using the telescope at Agassiz Station was named "Whipple" in honor of the former director of sao. Dr. Fred L. Whipple.
With support from the National Science Foundation and in an effort to expand United States knowledge of other ongoing research information systems worldwide, and to facilitate the exchange of information, ssie has taken a series of steps designed to identify and subsequently expand its coverage in selected areas of major national interest. As an important part of this effort the unisist Program of unesco in conjunction with ssie has organized a three- day International Symposium on Information Systems and Services in Ongoing Research in Science to be held in Paris in October 1975. Dr. Hersey has been designated as symposium chairman and head of the program committee, which has outlined the purpose of the symposium as threefold:
The STRI program on human adaptations to tropical areas began this year with an exciting week-long seminar at Barro Colorado Island, where a number of distinguished anthropologists and biolo- gists were invited for informal discussions of new research and recent methodology. Representing the Institute Venezolano de Investigaciones Cienti'ficas were Dra. Erika Wagner, and Dra. Alberta Zucchi, who is working on the ridgefield systems of the Venezuelan Llanos. From Colombia came Drs. Gerardo and Alicia Reichel-Dolmatoff, well known for their pioneering work on the archeology of northern Colombia, and on the ethnology of various Colombian Indian groups. Representing the biological disciplines were Dr. C. Earle Smith of the University of Alabama, and Dr. Alan Covich of Washington University, who together discussed the dynamics of plant domestication and their interaction with faunal communities in the tropics.
Besides holding discussions with the stri staff and graduate stu- dents, as well as with Panamanian professionals, the visiting scien- tists were taken on a tour of archeological sites in the central provinces. On hand to discuss his own research on the transition from hunting-gathering to agriculture on the Isthmus was Dr. Anthony J. Ranere, a stri associate, who led the group to show them the Aguadulce preceramic rockshelter, where he is continuing excavations this year. A second morning was spent visiting the
Sitio Sierra began as a snnall prehispanic maize-growing village located on the shores of the Santa Maria river. Code province, during the first centuries after the Christian era (circa a.d. 200). Despite having to work one step ahead of bulldozers ready to level off the mounded area in order to plant sugarcane. Dr. Cooke was able to recover an impressive sample of the faunal and floral re- sources exploited by the riverine group in the drier section of the Isthmus during pre-Sitio Conte days. This was accomplished by fine-screening, excavating housefloors, and concentrating on the horizontal exposure of activity areas. Comparisons of the Sitio Sierra materials with those excavated by Dra. Olga F. Linares of STRi, and members of her research team, is resulting in a volume on the evolution of differential adaptations to the wet versus the seasonal tropics of Panama.
Based upon a visit to Papua, New Guinea, by Rubinoff and Rand, the Smithsonian became a sponsoring member of the Wau Ecology Institute. With support from the International Environmental Pro- gram and the Fluid Research Fund, stri sent Dr. Tyson Roberts to initiate an ecological investigation of the fishes of the Fly River and Dr. Alan Smith to begin studies of tree ferns on Mt. Wilhelm in Papua, New Guinea.
Dr. D. R. Robertson, a fish behaviorist, has accepted an appoint- ment as our newest staff member. He will continue his work on the sexual behavior of fishes.
In HIS RECENT VOLUME of reminiscences, charmingly and most ap- propriately titled Self-Portrait with Donors, the former Director of the National Gallery of Art laments a change he has observed in the thinking of museum directors. "Until recently the directors of European and American museums have had the same basic phi- losophy," John Walker writes. "Their primary interest has been the acquisition of masterpieces." Of late, he observes, this interest has been subordinated to a concern for "relevance" and for rather vaguely defined programs of "social service." Mr. Walker leaves no doubt where his sympathies lie: "I fervently hope my colleagues will regain faith in their original mission, which once was to as- semble and exhibit masterpieces."
Despite the survival in the art museum world of a few individual directors who compete flamboyantly for the title of Grand Acquis- itor, Mr. Walker's characterization is evidently correct for the profession as a whole. In a survey conducted last year for the Na- tional Endowment for the Arts, a national sample of museum directors was asked to evaluate in order of importance ten specified functions of museums. In the resulting hst, "acquiring works or specimens" was rated fifth by the respondents; art museum di- rectors rated acquisition as fourth in importance, history museum directors rated it as fifth, and art/history museum directors rated it as fifth. ^ Exhibitions, conservation, the education of children, and
Granting that Mr. Walker's explicit emphasis on the acquisition of "masterpieces" severely limits the generality of his message, which is primarily addressed to the directors and trustees of great and wealthy art museums, there does seem to be an element of paradox in the results of the Arts Endowment survey. For the fact is that each of the functions regarded as more important than the acquisition of collections presupposes the existence of collections. One is reminded of a similar paradox that at least used to exist in colleges and universities: the marriage of a faculty member and a student tended to be viewed with great pleasure in the com- munity, but the courtship of a student by a faculty member was generally thought to be improper if not positively indecent. Simi- larly, it is assumed that museums have collections, but there is some uneasiness about the notion that they should get collections.
In all fairness one must admit that attitudes in the museum world are no less pendulum-like than those in other areas of human en- deavor. The results of the Arts Endowment survey mirror a rather recent shift of emphasis from the goal of acquiring objects to the goal of preserving and using them. Mr. Walker himself applauds the development of long-term loan programs, through which mu- seums with vast collections in storage can help to fill the galleries of less fortunate museums. The growing concern for conservation of museum objects should undoubtedly lead to a welcome redis- tribution of museum resources. Similarly, a persuasive case can be made for the variety of activities designed both to widen and to deepen the use of objects that museums already have in their col- lections. The Smithsonian is proud of having participated in each of these developments, and intends to continue to do so.
But perhaps the pendulum has swung a trifle too far? Perhaps we should heed Mr. Walker's advice and regain faith in our original mission of acquiring? To do so, to maintain an active interest in
The Museum accepted 886 gifts for the collections and 39,317 items for the library. Among the most important were a large group of designs by Simon Lissim for porcelain, silver, playing cards, and screens; an eighteenth-century altar frontal embroidered in China for the Western market; and seventeen pieces of art deco and Tiffany glass and metalwork. In addition, McDonnell Aircraft Company has donated equipment necessary to establish a holography laboratory. An Advisory Committee for the Museum's Holography Program is headed by Dr. Denis Gabor, the Nobel Laureate.
A second annual benefit auction was held in May in the Museum garden, with Mrs. Gerald Ford as honorary patron. Proceeds of the auction, approximately $125,000, were contributed to the renovation of the Carnegie Mansion. In addition, the Museum re- ceived major grants from the New York State Council on the Arts, the National Endowment for the Arts, and the Mobil Foundation.
Two members have been added to the staff: as Librarian, Mr. Robert Kaufmann, former librarian of the Art and Architecture School at Yale; and, as Curator of Decorative Arts, Mr. J. Stewart Johnson, former curator of decorative arts at the Brooklyn Museum. Sadly, we must report that Mrs. Mary Blackwelder, Museum Registrar for eighteen years, died in April, after a long illness.
Dr. Esin Atil, Associate Curator, Near Eastern Art, Freer Gallery of Art, shows Mobil's President William P. Tavoulareas (on the right) the unique decoration on one of the eighty objects of art displayed in the "Art of the Arab World" exhibition.
For many years the Technical Laboratory of the Freer Gallery of Art has been engaged in research relating to metal corrosion. W. T. Chase, Head Conservator, was asked by the John D. Rocke- feller III Fund to survey the major conservation facilities and bronze collections in Asia and to recommend ways in which some of the more pressing problems of bronze conservation might be alleviated. Mr. Chase strongly advised that an organized program of bronze treatment and care be established in Thailand to prevent the further deterioration of the extraordinary number of objects infected with bronze disease. At the same time, a project was also begun on an exhibition to be shown in Bangkok which would demonstrate the importance of a national conservation program in Thailand. Mr. Chase assisted in the selection, planning, and organization of the exhibition. He also wrote the text used in the catalogue.
Dr. Esin Atil, Curator of Near Eastern Art, organized a special exhibition entitled, "Art of the Arab World." In the catalogue written by Dr. Atil, each of the eighty objects included in the exhibition is illustrated in color and discussed in detail. Approxi-
The large collection of American paintings is among the most important included in the original Charles Lang Freer bequest. The numerous works by James McNeill Whistler make the Gallery a focal point for any study of that artist. Dr. Susan Hobbs joined the Smithsonian Institution during fiscal year 1975, serving as Joint-Curator of American Art both in the Freer Gallery of Art and in the National Collection of Fine Arts. Dr. Hobbs is cur- rently reviewing the entire American collection in the Gallery preparatory to writing the catalogue for a special exhibition of American paintings scheduled for 1976. Dr. Hobbs is also pre- paring entries on a select group of American paintings to be illustrated in the Freer handbook.
In the course of fiscal year 1975, the collections were expanded by the accession of twenty-two objects. Of those, several fine items were acquired by gift from Mr. and Mrs. Province Henry of McLean, Virginia. Over 300 volumes, catalogues, reports, period- icals, bulletins, and notebooks were given to the library by Mrs. Rutherford J. Gettens, Colonel F. B. Hoffman, and Mr. and Mrs. Province Henry.
The assistant curator established a special system for assigning accession numbers to the objects in the art collection. Since this collection consists predominantly of the decorative arts, the system is based on the materials out of which the objects are made, e.g., gold, porcelain, wood, etc. A card file, arranged according to these categories, is being prepared with the assistance of a part-time volunteer. Another card file records the location of the object. Thus far, approximately 2200 cards have been made for objects in Mrs. Post's bequest of September 1973.
Over the years, from the very beginning of the Smithsonian, the collection which is now the National Collection of Fine Arts has acquired a wide and representative range of American art, including not only works by the acknowledged great, but also those by artists who were acclaimed in their time but ignored by succeeding genera- tions. Now numbering over 17,000 works, the ncfa continues to be concerned with all aspects of American art. It searches for works to fill areas poorly covered in the past and acquires a broad cross section of contemporary material. It is rare, however, that it has the pleasure of adding to the Collection such masterpieces as the two superb portraits by Ralph Earl, painted in 1792, acquired by purchase and partial gift this year. According to the descendant from whom the works were acquired, the stern-faced Mrs. Mary W. Alsop took over the family importing business on the death of her husband, using her helpful mother, the subject of the other portrait, as a kind of watchful lieutenant. The carefully specific landscapes in the backgrounds are among Earl's finest.
Two exhibitions highlighted the year: "American Art in the Barbizon Mood" and "Academy." The first, directed by Dr. Peter Bermingham, Curator of Education, who wrote the authoritative publication accompanying the show, explored the work of those late nineteenth-century American painters who painted with the French painters in Barbizon or were attracted by the "Barbizon Mood." This, the first thorough look at these painters, who were shown here side by side with their French colleagues, proved reveal- ing in both quality and variety.
The exhibition, "Academy," directed by Dr. Lois Fink, Curator of Research, and commemorating the founding of the National Academy of Design in 1825, was produced with the extensive co- operation of that institution. The 271-page publication. Academy: The Academic Tradition in American Art, is based on a new study of the Academy's records, which have now been microfilmed. Many paintings from the Academy's collection, unseen for years, were restored for the show.
The staff also has participated in professional activity outside the Museum. Several have juried exhibitions in various parts of the country and presented lectures either on the museum or in their special field. Mrs. Edith I. Martin of the Renwick Gallery was active in both the local and national organization of the National Conference of Artists. Miss Abigail Booth, who heads the Bicen- tennial Inventory of American Painting Before 1914, met with volunteer groups in many cities who are actively studying works in local collections at the behest of the Inventory. The Inventory is in touch with some 2500 individuals and agencies, and has now registered descriptions of 150,000 paintings. The museum's educa- tional activities have been much studied by professionals from here and abroad, and, in August, Miss Margery Gordon of the education
The project was a multidisciplinary effort, based upon two years of research by Mrs. Kidwell, coordinator of the exhibit, assisted by Donald Kloster, Assistant Curator of Military History, and Grace Cooper, Curator of Textiles. An Apparel Advisory Group made up of fashion designers, clothing manufacturers and retailers, and fashion editors assisted curators in the selection of the con- temporary fashions shown. Some of the clothing on display was
Three remaining Bicentennial exhibitions have been progressing rapidly, with the majority of the Museum staff redirected toward these endeavors. "American Banking," the Museum's first major exhibit on this vital aspect of American life, will open on September 17, 1975. This exhibition, made possible by a grant from the American Bankers Association, is being prepared under the direc- tion of Dr. Vladimir and Mrs. Elvira Clain-Stefanelli, Curators of Numismatics, and designed by the firm of Joseph A. Wetzel of Stamford, Connecticut. The exhibit will be installed in the Museum's third-floor special exhibits gallery.
In "America Set to Music," a selection of songsheets from the collection of Mr. Lester S. Levy of Pikesville, Maryland, were dis- played with objects in the Museum's collections suggested by the musical scores. The sheet music evoked vivid pictures of nine- teenth-century American life, ranging in theme from national issues and politics to romance, fashion, parlor games, and popular sports for men and women. Some of the sheet music related to American
From January to May, the nmht was host to "Steuben, Seventy Years of American Glassmaking," a traveling exhibition, organized by the Toledo Museum of Art, featuring more than 100 of Steuben's greatest accomplishments since 1903. Highlighted in the exhibit were major pieces which had served as gifts of state, such as the "Great Ring of Canada," America's gift to the people of Canada on that nation's centennial in 1967, and the "Merry-Go-Round Bowl" which President and Mrs. Truman presented to Queen Elizabeth II at her marriage in 1947.
The continuing philatelic lectures presented in cooperation with the United States Postal Service featured four stamp issues; Greever Allan on "The Universal Postal Union 1874-1974"; Dr. Keith E. Melder on "The Chautauqua Centennial"; and Mr. Sinclair H. Hitchings on "Currier and Ives, and Their Art." Subse- quent lectures looked at the stamp series "Contributors to the Cause," with speakers Dr. Lillian B. Miller and Mr. Rodney H. C. Schmidt, and finally the quartet of stamps issued by the Postal Service depicting "Military Uniforms of the American Revolution." Edward T. Vebell, designer of the stamps, was the evening's speaker.
This year the Museum was called upon to repair the ceremonial mace of the House of Representatives. Under the supervision of Mr. Robert M. Organ of the Conservation-Analytical Laboratory, the historic mace was examined and repaired by Mr. Robert Klinger and Mr. Donald Hoist of the Office of Exhibits Model Shop. The mace, not originally designed to stand upright, when first presented to the House of Representatives 133 years ago, was altered so that it could stand upon a marble base when the House was in session. In the course of the years the tenon fitting into the marble had loosened. Repair included replacing the original wooden
In the Division of Political History, the generous gift of ap- proximately 15,000 more objects relating to political campaigning from Mr. Ralph E. Becker brings together the entire Becker collec- tion. Combined with more than 4000 objects from the Honorable Michael V. Disalle and 665 objects from the estate of the late
Presentation of Rush Tray to the Smithsonian, February 1975, in the Secretary's Parlor, Smithsonian Institution Building. Left to right, Colonel Benjamin Rush III, Curator Anne Golovin, Curator James M. Goode, and Mrs. Benjmain Rush II.
The Division also acquired an engraved silver platter inscribed to Dr. Benjamin Rush in 1798 for his services to Philadelphia's City Hospital during that year's yellow fever calamity. America's lead- ing physician until his death in 1813, Dr. Rush, signer of the Declaration of Independence, was Surgeon General during the American Revolution. His son, Richard, who inherited the platter, was Minister to France and England, and was instrumental in ob-
In April the Institute served as host at the Smithsonian for a conference with representatives of various Federal agencies and services to establish the historic vessel. Monitor, as a marine sanctuary. In April a meeting sponsored by the Institute and held in the Museum brought together representatives of the Ford Foundation, leading television corporations, telecommunications ex- perts, historians, representatives of the Library of Congress, the National Archives, and the National Education Association. The purpose of the meeting, which was chaired by Dr. Eric Barnow, was to suggest guidelines for preserving television footage which would save vital materials for future historical purposes.
The Institute has announced plans for three conferences on United States occupation poUcies to be held under its sponsorship at the MacArthur Memorial Library, in Norfolk, Virginia; the Marshall Research Foundation of Lexington, Virginia; and at the Smithsonian Institution. Dr. Pogue has been working with planning committees of the cooperating institutions.
In 1974 Dr. Robert P. Multhauf, former Director of the Museum and presently Senior Scientific Scholar, was elected by the National Academy of Sciences to chair the American delegation to the XlVth International Congress of the History of Science held in Tokyo and Kyoto, Japan, in August.
The donor of the Library, Dr. Bern Dibner, founded the Burndy Corporation in 1924 and the Burndy Library in 1936. He has long been recognized as a leading collector of source material on the history of science, and, as Director of the Burndy Library since its founding, has patiently assembled the more than 40,000 works which form its collections and which make it one of the largest single collection of books in this subject field.
During the past year, sixty portraits came to the Gallery by gift and purchase. Clearly the most important of the gifts were "port- hole" portraits of George and Martha Washington (so-called be- cause they were painted within trompe I'oeil architectural ovals) by Rembrandt Peale, presented by an anonymous donor. Also worthy of special mention are a pastel portrait of Gouverneur Morris by James Sharpies, given by Miss Ethel Turnbull; an oil sketch of Cyrus McCormick by Charles Loring Elliott, the gift of The Chauncey and Marion Deering McCormick Foundation and Mrs. Anne B. Harrison; and a bust of William Lloyd Garrison by Anne Whitney, presented by Lloyd Kirkham Garrison.
The Gallery's exhibition program focused primarily on the Bi- centennial with two extensive displays, "In the Minds and Hearts of the People, 1760-1774" and "The Dye is Now Cast, 1774- 1776," each containing some 250 portraits and objects of other kinds. Full-scale catalogues (of 240 and 344 pages, respectively) accompanied each of these exhibitions, and materials specially in- tended for secondary school students were prepared by the Gallery's Education Department. The Gallery also mounted a special exhibition for the Archives of American Art entitled "From Reliable Sources," consisting of letters, documents, and photo- graphs from the Archives' collections. The 761 St.-Memin portrait engravings given the Gallery last year by Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon were installed in a gallery permanently set aside for the collection. A number of small exhibitions were also mounted, in- cluding one on John Brown and two devoted to the centennials of the births of Herbert Hoover and Winston Churchill.
The long-anticipated work on the Papers of Charles Willson Peale and his Family was begun this year under the editorship of Dr. Lillian B. Miller and with an initial two-year grant from The National Endowment for the Humanities.
To complement these programs the Office of Academic Studies attempts to assist other individuals who desire a shorter period of study at the Institution. A Short-Term Visitor Program offers modest financial support to visitors at all academic levels who wish to consult staff members for a few days or weeks in the pursuit of their research problems. By offering this modest support to supple- ment the visitor's own resources, this program provides many opportunities for individuals to conduct necessary research at the Institution. In 1974-1975, twenty-seven visitors were offered sup- port under this program. Additionally, a Seminar Program offers Smithsonian research faculty the opportunity to organize seminars at the Institution. These seminars are designed to bring together distinguished scientists and scholars and students from around the world to discuss ideas and concepts of common interest. During fiscal year 1975 two such seminars were supported. Dr. Olga Linares conducted a seminar on Barro Colorado Island on the social transition from hunting-gathering to agriculture in the tropics as inferred from present-day replication experiments. The ten partici- pants included two scientists from Venezuela and one from Colombia. Dr. Richard Baumann, entomologist at the National Museum of Natural History, organized and chaired The Fifth International Symposium on Plecoptera. The thirty participants in- cluded visitors from Germany, Canada, Norway, New Zealand, Yugoslavia, India, and Japan.
Students in Dr. Cary Carson's American Studies Program class, "Material Aspects of American Civilization: Vernacular Architecture," taking measured drawings of the Smithsonian Institution's Belmont House during weekend field trip, March 21-23, 1975.
The Office of Museum Programs strengthened its coordinating and training capabilities by adding a highly experienced member to its staff. Mrs. Jane Glaser, former Director of the Charleston (West Virginia) Children's Museum, was named Manager of Training Activities. Under her direction the workshops on museum manage- ment will be expanded, and special training programs will be de- veloped, with emphasis on the special needs of the Indian com-
A study on visitor orientation at nmht, conducted by Dr. Gary H. Winkel, of the City University of New York, with staff assistance, was completed, and the first part of an analysis of The National Museum of Natural History as a Behavioral Environment by staff member Robert Lakota was readied.
From an administrative standpoint, a major and felicitous event occurred in the Office of Museum Programs when Mr. William N. Richards became Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary.
Mr. Richard's long experience in museum and governmental matters as Director of the Bureau of Museums for the State of Pennsyl- vania has, in the short time he has been with this office, already proved invaluable, and his guidance has been especially helpful in developing the revised procedures for the National Museum Act. In the management of the activities reported on above and in others, the Assistant Secretary for Museum Programs participated actively. In addition, he served as the Institution's designee on the Advisory Council for Historic Preservation, as Vice President of the American Association of Museums, Vice President of the Inter- national Council on Museums, and Vice President of the Interna- tional Centre for Conservation in Rome and United States Delegate to its General Assembly.
The Museum Workshop Series takes advantage of the unique human resources of the various museums and research depart- ments of the Institution. The training office coordinates lectures, seminars, and workshops on various aspects of museum manage- ment. This program, which has been in existence for a number of years, has been reorganized in the past few months and will be presenting more frequent and a larger choice of offerings. Under the direction of Mrs. Jane R. Glaser, former Director of the
The Conservation Information Program prepares, in cooperation with the Smithsonian Institution Conservation-Analytical Labora- tory, and with the assistance of other museum laboratories and research organizations when required, video tapes and slide pro- grams intended to demonstrate the basic principles of chemistry that apply to conservation and up-to-date methods in the handling of artifacts. Seventeen slide presentations, accompanied by taped narrations, have been announced, and others are in various stages of completion. These slide/tape presentations are available free-of- charge to museums, historical societies, training and research organizations throughout the United States and abroad. Editing has been completed on a series of eighty video-taped lectures, a half-hour to an hour in duration, presented by Dr. Robert M. Organ, Chief of the Conservation-Analytical Laboratory. Copies of these will be available in cassettes or reel-to-reel form. They present a unique panorama of the basic principles of chemistry and of conservation practice. The first twenty are now being distributed, and it is expected that the entire series will be available by the fall of 1975.
Dr. Gary H. Winkel, Associate Professor, Environmental Psy- chology Program, City University of New York, was retained as a special consultant to study the visitor flow and orientation patterns at the National Museum of History and Technology. His study, completed in June 1975, will be carefully analyzed prior to the introduction of new orientation devices at the National Museum of History and Technology. Other studies conducted in the last few months are attempting to gauge the effectiveness of nonuni- formed attendants in providing information and security in an art museum environment. Studies of Visitor Behavior in Museums and Exhibitions: An Annotated Bibliography of Sources Primarily in the English Language, by Dr. Ross J. Loomis, of the University of Colorado, and Miss Pamala Elliott, was also completed.
This increase in staff size, and the concomitant growth of service responsibilities and funding for collection development heightened the need to attend to management issues. Implementation of the recommendations of the Management Review and Analysis Pro- gram (mrap), begun in the preceding year, continued, under the watchful eye of an Implementation Assessment Group composed of Libraries' staff members. Special studies were conducted of the Libraries Technical Services operation, and a survey of users' services was begun. The Libraries' experiences continued to be shared with several other major research libraries undergoing the MRAP process, chiefly through seminars and lectures given by Dr. Elaine Sloan, chairperson of the team that conducted the Smithsonian's study. The Libraries also conducted a one-day work- shop in cooperation with the Consortium of Universities in Washington and the Association of Research Libraries Office of Management Studies on the issues and problems of implementation of management change. In addition, the Director was appointed to the Management Commission of the Association of Research Libraries under whose aegis mrap was developed. As part of the implementation process, the Administrative Conference of the Libraries, composed of the managers of library units and Libraries' administrative staff, met at regular intervals to exchange informa- tion and to discuss management and operational concerns. A program was established to document policies and procedures for library management.
For the first time the Libraries were funded sufficiently well to establish a base for a continuing budget for the acquisition of library materials, although the gains were somewhat muted by the severe inflation of book prices. The most significant event in collection development, however, was the acquisition by gift of the major titles in the Burndy Library devoted to the history of science and technology. The collections in this noted research library have been gathered by Dr. Bern Dibner, a manufacturer of electrical products in Norwalk, Connecticut. The Dibner collection matches precisely the programs of research in the National Museum of History and Technology and will be housed in that bureau. Mr. William Leugoud was recruited from the staff of the Rare Books Department of the Library of Congress to be the librarian of the collection. The Libraries received other important
The Libraries' contribution to the library profession included in- volvement of the staff in local, national, and international activities. Catherine Scott continued her service as a member of the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science. The Commis- sion's program statement for national library information service was completed during the year. The Director represented the Smithsonian Institution as an observer at the unesco Conference on national planning of library, archive, and documentation serv- ice in Paris. The Smithsonian Institution held a reception for the nearly 1000 delegates of the International Federation of Library Associations at its first United States meeting. The National Copy- right Conference, convened by the Register of Copyrights and the Chairman of the National Commission on Libraries and Informa- tion Science, met twice at the Smithsonian Institution as pub- lishers and librarians attempted to resolve issues raised by the proposed copyright law revision. The Director was elected to the Board of Directors of the Association of Research Libraries and the Executive Board of the American Library Association, and assumed the office of President of the United States Book Exchange of which the Institution is a sponsoring member. Dr. Elaine Sloan served as a consultant to the American Library Association's Collection
Dr Henry E Wenden lectures on coverlets at the University of Cincinnati in December. "American Coverlets" is the prototype for sites' information core shows— shows that are expressly designed for the addition of local arti- facts. SITES will produce no less than fifty exhibitions for the Bicentennial, several in multiple copies.
Mr. Joseph H. Hirshhorn being interviewed by WTTG's Channel 5 newscaster Maury Povich (left) and Frank Getlein (right), art critic of the Washington Star.
John Kinard, Director of the Anacostia Neighborhood Museum, gives a talk for visiting members of the international museum community. Below. Mr. Kinard greets visitors from Togo. Shown (from left) are Kikou Mathias Aithnard, Director of Culture and Scientific Research; William Adojyi, Cultural Attache, Togo Embassy; Agbenowossi Kodjo Koffi, Minister of Youth, Sports, Culture and Scientific Research. The Togolese officials were interested in the role of the Smithsonian in the cultural life of the United States and Washington, particularly in seeing how the neighborhood museum works with young people.
Special tours were arranged during the year for the Empress of Iran, Mrs. Nelson Rockefeller and her sons, and many other dis- tinguished visitors. During the Festival of American Folklife, special tours were conducted for representatives of the People's Republic of China, George Meany of the AFL-CIO, and several groups of diplomats posted in Washington. Secreatry of State Henry Kissinger was the host at a luncheon at Hillwood for the Shah and Empress of Iran. Secretary and Mrs. Ripley were the hosts at a luncheon for the Empress of Iran at the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden and at a luncheon for Sir John and Lady Llewellyn, and a dinner for the Duke of Gloucester.
Continuing its function as a Smithsonian resource facility, the office organized for the National Aeronautics and Space Admin- istration a one-week seminar on the "Outlook for Space," designed to provide insight into the social-political-economic-cultural en- vironment foreseen for the remainder of this century, to assist in planning future space research and exploration. Some thirty guest discussants and twenty-five scientists and astronauts from nasa participated in the meetings at Hammersmith Farm, the summer estate of Mr. and Mrs. Hugh D. Auchincloss at Newport, Rhode Island. As a result of the seminar, the office has been approached by the Preservation Society of Newport County and other civic groups and leaders to advise on ways and means to take advantage educationally of the architectural resources of their community for seminar and symposium activities. For example, the office is assist- ing in the planning of a Bicentennial symposium on the history of religious toleration and freedom in the United States which will make use of Touro Synagogue, Trinity Church, and other historic structures as settings for scholarly dialogues.
Reading Is Fundamental, Inc. (rif) will celebrate its tenth anni- versary during the Bicentennial year. Founded by Mrs. Robert S. McNamara as a national, nonprofit, tax-exempt organization, its program is designed to motivate children to read.
A unique book entitled. Our Collective Gift to this Nation, will be published for rif by Doubleday. Eliot Wigginton, President of the Board of the Foxfire Fund, Rabun Gap, Georgia, will direct the project and edit the book. It will be composed of interviews con- ducted by hundreds of high school students representing most of the cultural groups in this country. The subjects for their inter- views will be older people — in many cases their relatives — who live in their communities. Mr. Wigginton describes the book as an opportunity for our grandparents to speak from their special per- spective — "a forum where men and women from every culture can come together to express, through their grandchildren, their hopes and fears for us as a nation, and their dreams for us as a world."
Later in the spring, a similar exhibit was presented on the premises of the First National Bank in Palm Beach, Florida. Several hundred Associates inspected the gems and were guests at a recep- tion for Secretary and Mrs. Ripley.
In a recent issue of The Neio York Times, Philip H. Dougherty in his media column pointed out that Smithsonian was among the top six of 100 national consumer magazines to show an increase of more than 10 percent in advertising pages during the first six months of 1975 over the year earlier period. To quote Mr. Dougherty:
Favorable critical reviews — an all-important factor in a book's success — have contributed to sell-out first editions of The Outdoor Sculpture of Washington, D.C. (paperback) by James M. Goode, Curator, Smithsonian Institution Building, and The Peoples and Cultures of Ancient Peru by Luis G. Lumbreras, translated by Dr. Betty Meggers of the Department of Anthropology, National Mu- seum of Natural History.
Auction held at the National Zoo by the Women's Committee, May 22, 1975. Mrs. S. D. Ripley places a bid on the flower prints by Mary Vaux Walcott. Below: View of the supper held in the Monkey House during the auction at the National Zoo held by the Women's Committee, May 22, 1975.
A Thursday Seminar series of outstanding speakers was begun by the Council in May. This series, designed to appeal to all Smithsonian employees, has featured Euphesenia Foster, Education and Special Projects Officer, Department of Justice, Bureau of Prisons, who spoke about her work on sensitizing the public to the needs of the woman offender; Dr. Estelle Ramey, Professor of Physiology and Biophysics, Georgetown University Medical School, whose subject was "Sex Hormones and the G5 Rating"; and Mr. William Blakey, Director of Congressional Liaison for the United States Commission on Civil Rights. The Thursday Seminar series has been received enthusiastically by Smithsonian employees.
In the memorial to an internationalist president it is fitting to focus special attention on key areas of concern abroad. Thus, the Board of Trustees established in December 1974, under the leader- ship of Center fellow George Kennan, a new Institute for Ad- vanced Russian Studies. Mr. Kennan's unique stature as the senior scholar-statesman of Soviet-American relations makes him a uniquely appropriate chairman of the advisory council for this new effort within the Center. Assembling a small but superior group of fellows in this area will permit greater use of the unmatched re- sources in Washington, and will hopefully serve as a fresh catalyst for the continuing national effort to understand better the other great superpower.
During the past year, President Ford reappointed Frank N. Ikard, Mrs. Stephen Smith, and Ms. Donna J. Stone and also named as members The Honorable Peter H. B. Frelinghuysen, The Honorable J. William Fulbright, R. Phillip Hanes, Jr., and The Honorable Mel- vin Laird. Both Mr. Frelinghuysen and Mr. Fulbright have pre- viously served as ex-officio members.
Mrs. Gerald R. Ford has graciously consented to serve as Honor- ary Chairman of the Center and joins Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower, Mrs. Aristotle Onassis, Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, and Mrs. Richard Nixon in that capacity.
By unanimous vote, the Board of Trustees elected Mrs. George A. Garrett the Center's first and only Honorary Trustee, in recog- nition of her years of dedicated service to the institution. Mrs. Garrett served as a member of the Board from 1958 until 1975.
The national gallery of art, although formally established as a bureau of the Smithsonian Institution, is an autonomous and sepa- rately administered organization. It is governed by its own Board of Trustees, the statutory members of which are the Chief Justice of the United States, Chairman; the Secretary of State; the Secretary of the Treasury; and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, all ex officio; and five general trustees. Paul Mellon continued as president of the Gallery and John Hay Whitney as vice president. The other general trustees continuing to serve were Carlisle H. Humelsine, Dr. Franklin D. Murphy, and Stoddard M. Stevens.
Dr. Roger D. Abrahams. Chairman, Department of English, Professor of Eng- lish and Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
Dr. Muriel M. Berman. Civic, art, and college affairs, "20 Hundred" Notting- harn Road, Allentown, Pennsylvania (Honorary Member).
Dr. Frederick H. Burkhardt. President Emeritus, American Council of Learned Societies, RFD #1, Bennington, Vermont.
Ms. Anne d'Harnoncourt, Curator, Philadelphia Museum of Art, Parkway at 26th Street, P.O. Box 7646, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Dr. Donald S. Farner. Chairman, Department of Zoology, University of Wash- ington, Seattle, Washington (Honorary Member).
Dr. Frank B. Golley. Executive Director, Institute of Ecology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia.
Dr. David Hawkins. Director, Mountain View Center for Environmental Edu- cation, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado.
Dr. Jan LaRue. Director of Graduate Studies, Department of Music, New York University, New York, New York (Honorary Member).
Dr. James L. Liverman. Director, Division of Biomedical and Environmental Research, U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, Washington, D.C.
Dr. Giles W. Mead. Director, Los Angeles County, Museum of Natural His- tory, Los Angeles, California.
Dr. Ruth Patrick. Chairman of the Board, The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Mr. Philip C. Ritterbush. Center for the Study of Popular Education and Recreation, Wallpack Village, New Jersey (Honorary Member).
Massachusetts (Honorary Member). Professor Warren H. Wagner, Jr. Ann Arbor, Michigan (Honorary Member). Dr. Rainer Zangerl. Chairman, Department of Geology, Field Museum of
Mr. Fred Hill Mr. Edward Hope Mrs. Theresa Howe Jones Mrs. Delia Lowery Mr. Curtis Magruder Mrs. Caryl Marsh Mrs. Francis Mason-Jones Mrs. Cecelia Matthews Mr. Russell Paxton Dr. Charles Quails Mr. Fred Saunders Mrs. Lillian Smallwood Mr. Charles Stephenson Mrs. Esther Sullivan
Harold O. Love Russell Lynes Abraham Melamed Mrs. Dana M. Raymond Mrs. William L. Richards Stephen Shalom Stanford C. Stoddard Edward M. M. Warburg George H. Waterman III S. Dillon Ripley, ex officio Charles Blitzer, ex officio
Dr. Jay Ruby, President, Society for the Anthropology of Visual Communica- tion, do Temple University, Philadelphia.
Mrs. Emilie de Brigard, Guest Director, Anthropological Cinema, Department of Film, Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Thomas E. Murray II, Chairman Pro Tern Cass Canfield, Jr. Albert L. Edelman Sidney Gruson Mrs. Matthew A. Meyer Mrs. Miles Pennybacker
The Honorable Hugh Scott, Chairman, United States Senate, Washington, D.C. Mr. Laurence Sickman, Assistant Chairman, Director, William Rockhill Nelson Gallery of Art, 4525 Oak Street, Kansas City, Missouri.
Mr. Jefferson W. Cochran, Associate Administrator for Engineering and De- velopment (FAA), Department of Transportation, Washington, D.C.
Mr. Willis H. Shapley, Associate Deputy Administrator, National Aero- nautics and Space Administration, Washington, D.C.
Thomas C. Howe Mrs. Jaquelin H. Hume David Lloyd Kreeger Abram Lerner, ex officio Mrs. Doris M. Magowan Henry P. Mcllhenny Ogden M. Pleissner Harold Rosenberg Charles H. Sawyer Mrs. Otto L. Spaeth Otto Wittman
Smithsonian Institution. Dr. Robert A. Brooks, Under Secretary, Smithsonian Institution. Dr. Lee G. Burchinal, Head, Office of Science Information Service, National
Inc. Mr. S. Dillon Ripley, Secretary, Smithsonian Institution. Dr. R. W. Lamont-Havers, Acting Deputy Director, National Institutes of
Health. Dr. Charles W. Shilling, Executive Secretary, Undersea Medical Society, Inc. Mr. Alan D. Ullberg, Assistant General Counsel, Smithsonian Institution. Mr. T. Ames Wheeler, Treasurer, Smithsonian Institution.
Mr. Audubon and Mr. Bien: An Early Phase in the History of American Chromolithography. 11 pages, 2 color illustrations. March 14, 1975.
Society Bulletin, volume 44, number 5 (May 1975), page 405. Fosberg, F. R. "Dr. Raven's Proposals." Taxon, volume 24 (1975), pages 192-
Stanford, Dennis J., and John Albanese. "El Reparto Site, Tegucigalpa, Hon- duras: Preliminary Geological and Archeological Report." (Ms. on file) Instituto Nacional de Antropolgia e Historia de Honduras, Tegucigalpa. 1975.
October 2, 1974. "Relationships in Madagascar Bignoniaceae." Dr. Alwyn H. Gentry, Missouri Botanical Garden, Saint Louis.
March 19, 1975. "Dynamics of Epiphyte Populations in Western Oregon." Dr. Lawrence H. Pike, Assistant Professor of Biology, George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia.
April 15, 1975. "Are There Vascular Plants Older Than Late Silurian (Pri- dolian)?" Dr. Harlan P. Banks, Professor of Botany, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.
May 7, 1975. "Contemplating Coca." Dr. James A. Duke, Supervisory Botanist and Chief, Plant Taxonomy Laboratory, Plant Genetics and Germplasm In- stitute, U.S.D.A., Beltsville, Maryland.
May 14, 1975. "Botany in Malaysia." Dr. Benjamin C. Stone, Department of Botany, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
May 21, 1975. "Variations in Types of Branching in the Palms." Dr. Jack B. Fisher, Plant Morphologist, Fairchild Tropical Garden, Miami, Florida.
June 3, 1975. "Meristems, Mobilities and Ecological Strategies." Dr. P. B. Tom- linson. Professor of Botany, Maria Moors Cabot Foundation for Botanical Research of Harvard University at Harvard Forest, Petersham, Massa- chusetts.
Deva D. Tirvengadum, Ph.D. candidate, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes. Re- vision of tribes Gardeniae, Guettardae, and Knoxiae of the Rubiaceae for Sri Lanka, with Dr. F. Raymond Fosberg, Department of Botany, from December 15, 1974, through December 14, 1975.
Mr. Frederick R. Goff Mr. and Mrs. Frank Ikard Miss Frances L. Van Schaick Mr. and Mrs. Page W. Smith
Bechhoefer Mr. and Mrs. Roger K. Becker Mr. and Mrs. John M. Begg Mr. and Mrs. Spencer M. Berger Mr. Samuel W. Bernheimer Mr. and Mrs. Charles Blackledge Mr. and Mrs. C. William Bliss Mrs. Chambers Boehringer Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Bogan Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Bonner Mr. Vincent B. Boris Mr. and Mrs. F. Borowsky
A. M. Burden Mrs. Paul P. Burdon Mrs. Jackson Burke Mr. and Mrs. Harry Burns Miss Harriet Burroughs Dr. and Mrs. J. A. Burwell Mr. Marion B. Busch Mr. E. T. Byram Mr. Carlton E. Byrd Dr. and Mrs. Charles M. Cabaniss Mr. James Cagney Captain Terence L. Cahill Mr. and Mrs. James K. Campbell Mrs. Susan Campbell
Mr. and Mrs. S. Greenhoot Fischer Mr. and Mrs. Joel H. Fisher Mr. and Mrs. M. F. Flaherty Mr. Robert W. Fleming The Honorable and Mrs. Edward
Foley Mr. Harlan B. Forbes Mr. Earl M. Foreman Mrs. Henry P. Fowler Mr. and Mrs. Raymond R. Fox Ms Doris C. Freedman Mrs. Rowland G. Freeman Mr. and Mrs. Arthur H. Fribourg Mr. W. C. Frogale Mr. and Mrs. Geoffrey S. Fuller Mr. and Mrs. Sebastian Gaeta Mr. and Mrs. Arthur W. Gardner Mrs. T. Fleetwood Garner Mr. T. Jack Gary Miss Lutrelle P. Gearhart Mrs. V. J. Gianelloni Miss Edith C. Gibney Mr. and Mrs. W. T. Gillham Mrs. Jeanne A. Glaspey Mr. and Mrs. T. K. Glennan Dr. and Mrs. Jerome N. Goldman Dr. and Mrs. Arthur Goldsmith Col. and Mrs. Julius Goldstein Mrs. J. L. Goodwin Mrs. Evelyn Gottlieb Mrs. Katherine Graham Mr. and Mrs. Robert Graham Mrs. Gilbert C. Greenway Dr. and Mrs. John N. Grekin Mrs. Beatrice Grieder Mr. John F. Gunnell Dr. Mary A. Hall Mrs. Isaac Hamburger Mr. Courtnay C. Hamilton, Jr. Mr. Gordon Hanes Ms Morella R. Hansen Mr. Sol Harris, Jr. Mr. David T. Harvey, Jr. Mrs. Robert A. Heiderer Mr. Robert Heil Mrs. Joseph D. Heiman Mr. Alverne S. Hellenthal Dr. and Mrs. L. M. Hellman Mr. Jeffery L. Hendry Mr. Charles A. Hess Mr. and Mrs. Marvin Hirsh Mr. and Mrs. Albert G. Hoffman, Jr. Mrs. Arthur D. Holmes Mr. and Mrs. Hugh H. Honnen Mr. and Mrs. Arthur A. Houghton Mr. and Mrs. Samuel G. Houghton
Patterson Miss Ruth Uppercu Paul Mr. and Mrs. Chester Paulson Prof. Norman Holmes Pearson Mr. Louis Peller Mr. George Perez Miss Eleanor L. Perry Mr. and Mrs. H. M. Peterson Mr. and Mrs. Donald A. Petrie Mrs. Charles Emory Phillips Mr. Rae H. Pickrel Mr. James W. Pipher Col. Robert W. Poel Mr. and Mrs. J. F. Porter, Jr. Miss Katherine Anne Porter Mr. and Mrs. A. M. Prado Dr. and Mrs. Jerold Principato Mr. and Mrs. Robert Propst Mrs. Dow Puckett Dr. Dennis Quitner Miss Elsie Howland Quinby Mrs. J. R. Rael Dr. and Mrs. Ernest Rafey Mr. and Mrs. Mark Ragel Miss Mary E. Rail Mr. and Mrs. Ray Randlett Miss Margaret Rathbone Ms Isabel M. Rea Mrs. C. Story Reed Miss Jean Rentoul Mr. G. Edward Reynolds Mr. and Mrs. Sargent M. Reynolds Mrs. Robert B. Rheault Mr. Don Rhodes Mrs. Patricia C. Rice Mr. Pat Ridge Miss Anna C. Ridley Mr. James H. Ripley Mrs. Alice E. Rivard Mrs. Katherine Robbins
Foundation Mrs. Anthony Thomas Mr. Joseph A. Thomas Mr. and Mrs. Lowell E. Thompson Mr. and Mrs. Raymond Thornburg Mr. and Mrs. Dela C. Tifft
Catto, Jr. Ms Carmel Rose Cavanaugh Mr. C. M. Chabrel Mr. Dexter K. Cheney Mr. Dennis Chiocco Mr. Bertram M. Cohen
John Clifford Folger Mr. Cornelius Van S. Roosevelt Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Mr. P. A. B. Widener Mr. and Mrs. Sidney S. Zlotnick
Weppner, Mrs. Robert A., Checy Chase, Maryland (from estate of Mrs. Ava Maguire) : pair Renaissance Revival side tables. Renaissance Revival table, bronze bust of Abraham Lincoln by Gutzon Borglum, pedestal desk, two brass table lamps. Empire sofa, Lincoln-style rocker.
Muller, Dr. Kal: 42,000 feet of research film on naturally occurring human behavior in relation to cultural organization among the Huichol Indians of Mexico.
Time" Medal. Lipman, Mr. Eric M. : World War II German insignia and documents. Machado, Mrs. Anesia Panheiro: Sculpture of Alberto Santos-Dumont. McCray, Mrs. Helen: Schweizer 2-22 Sailplane. McGregor, Mr. Robert G.: We at Daybreak, painting by Pfister. Planes of Fame (Ed Malony) : Consolidated B-24 nose section. Rickenbacker, Estate of Captain Edward (through Marguerite Shepard) :
Armonia, Mrs. Patricia Liu: 19 women's garments, China (313317). Arrowood, G. T. : 1 huntite, Oregon (313976). Arrowood, Ted: 1 garnierite, Oregon (312892).
Ash, Dr. Sidney R. : 16 paleobotanical slide preparations, Arizona (312710). Averell, James L. : 1 burden basket, Yurok Indian (313318). Bacon, Mrs. Eva D. (see Dingman, Johnson). Bacon, Dr. Peter R.: 14 polychaetes. West Indies (310924). Baker, Dr. Alan N.: 1 echinoderm. New Zealand (312347). Baker, James H.: 336 butterflies, 532 flies (311700, 313683); 65 caddisflies
Bedette, Barbara A. and Blow, Warren C. : 1 lignitized cone, Virginia (315728). Behre, Dr. Eleanor H. : 3 crustaceans. North Carolina (315759). Belitsky, Dr. I. A.: 13 minerals, USSR (310989, exchange). Benitt, Ted: 1 tennantite, Africa (315520).
Benson, Dr. Richard H. : 27 fossil ostracod slides (315516, 315950). Berndt, Douglas J.: 2 minerals. North Carolina (311385). Bernhardt, John: 1 beetle. North America (312707). Beshear, Ramona J.: 3 lace bugs (311977, 313338). Beston, George L. : 1 goethite nodule, Washington, D. C. (312897). Betram, Dr. J. C: 9 wasps. Orient (311926). Biggart, Norman: 16 minerals, Massachusetts (311415). Bischoff, Dr. James L. : 200 vials Red Sea sediments (308865, exchange). Blake, Mrs. Doris H. : 34 mammal skins, 216 bird skins, 354 egg clutches
Boucot, Dr. Arthur J.: 26, 068 brachiopods. Nova Scotia (313880). Bowers, Dr. C. D.: 72 cicadas. North America (312027). Bowman, Dr. T. E. : 130+ crustaceans, Maine (312592). Bradley, Mrs. Louise A.: 6 schorl crystals, Virginia (315668). Brewer, George: 56 minerals (310987, 311935, 312759, 314044). Bridge, David: 27 bird skins, 40 bird skeletons. North America (313699). Brinck, Dr. Per: 3 scoliidae, Sri Lanka (311216). Brindle, Dr. A.: 2 earwigs (316284).
Britton, Dr. Joseph C. : 8 freshwater mollusks, Texas (310859). Brivio, Dr. Carlo: 2 scarab beetles, Michigan (316309). Brooks, Dr. Harold K. (see Collins, R. Lee). Brown, Clair A.: 15 plants, Louisiana (312836). Brown, Gregory: 2 painted barkcloths, Brazil (316303). Brown, Dr. W. L., Jr.: 59 insects (316318). Brown, Walter C: 3 geckos (315708). Brownell, Dr. Robert, Jr.: 8 marine mammals (316564). Brumbach, William C: 277 plants, Florida (305525, 308663, 309237). Bugbee, Dr. R. E.: 66 chalcid flies. North America (312007). Buell, William C, IV: 1 obsidian, Italy (311780). Bulmer, Dr. Walter: 33 frogs, lizards, and snakes (303425). Burggraf, Ingeborg: 47 minerals. New England (311417). Burke, Dr. Horace: 1 weevil (315225). Butler, Tomiko: 1 diopside, 2 epidote (314337). Butterworth, Mrs. Jean: 85 minerals. New England (311432). Cabri, Dr. Louis J.: 1 tulameenite (311041); 1 stillwaterite (313975). Caldwell, Dr. R. F.: 1 moth. New York (316548). Caldwell, Dr. Roy L. and Dingle, Dr. Hugh: 9 marine mollusks, Thailand
Covell, Dr. Charles V., Jr.: 4 butterflies. North America (315233). Craig, Mrs. Louis A.: 1 pottery water bottle, Mexico (316037). Craig, Dr. Wilfred S. : 1 caddisfly, Missouri (314063). Cressey, Dr. Roger F. : 2 lots washings, 500 marine mollusks (310512);
Cross, Jarrett L. : 1,707 insects. North America (315227). Crow, Mr. and Mrs. Charles: 4 pyrite, Ohio (311038). Currier, Rock H.: 17 minerals (311354, 313072). Daugherty, A. L. : 1 agate egg, Oregon (308376). Davies, Robert: 42 crustaceans, Maryland (314045). Davis, Lloyd R., Jr.: 143 moths. North America (312694). Dawson, Dr. C. E.: 92 marine mollusks, Indonesia (313114). Dawson, Y. E. (see Barnard, Dr. J. L.). DeBarros, Neylson: 4 stokesite, Brazil (311951). Decker, Bryce G.: 40 mollusks, Marquesas Islands (314013). Degener, Drs. Otto and Isa: 20 crustaceans, Hawaii (315152). Del Solar, Dr. Enrique M.: 772 crustaceans, 1 brachiopod (298992). Demaree, Delzie: 49 plants, U.S.A. (314186). De Meillon, Dr. Botha: 126 insects, Africa (315223). Denning, Dr. Donald G.: 204 stoneflies (312017, 316271). Dennis, Steve: 30 moths, Colorado (315220). Dingle, Dr. Hugh {see Caldwell, Dr. Roy L.).
Michigan (316267). Dobbins, Mr. and Mrs. Alex: 2 sea urchins, New Zealand (254774). Dodgson, James C. : 9 arrows, 1 bow and arrows. New Mexico (313313). Donnelly, Dr. T. W.: 2 damselflies, Puerto Rico (312002). Dornfeld, Dr. E. J.: 154 butterflies, Oregon (310438). Dow, Dr. Richard P.: 20 wasps. North America (314048). Downs, Mrs. Frederick R., Jr. (see Abbott, Mrs. Robert O., Jr.). Drummond, Mrs. F. O. : 25 minerals. North Carolina (314706). Drummond, Billy: 7 crustaceans, Costa Rica (312432, exchange). Dulin, Paul: 1 fossil seal jaw. North Carolina (313618). DuMond, Dr. David M.: 250+ copepods. North Carolina (316020). Dunn, Mrs. Ethel: 79 wolfeite (312902); 1 synthetic quartz crystal (313750);
Evans, Dr. and Mrs. Clifford: 1 headrest, Kenya; 1 armlet, Senegal (313310). Evans, Howard: 4 newts. New York (315146). Eyde, Dr. Richard (see Notzold, Dr. T.). Eyles, Dr. A. C. : 2 lace bugs. New Zealand (310455). Fairchild, Dr. G. B.: 8 horseflies (316323).
Fashing, Dr. Norman J.: 10 mite slides. North America (312692). Faul, Dr. Henry: 5 minerals (311020, 315180).
Felix, Dr. Charles J.: 60 slides on 99 palynological types (315615). Ferreira, Dr. Antonio J.: 1 marine mollusk (311428). Ferris, Dr. O. D.: 302 butterflies, U.S.A. (315096). Figiel, Dr. and Mrs. Leo S. and Figiel, Dr. and Mrs. Steven J.: 2 paintings,
India (316036). Finamore, Mrs. Ardis: 1 drum with sticks, American Indian (316263). Fix, Dr. Michael: 6 brachiopods, Missouri (312939). Fleisher, Dr. Robert L.: 186 foraminifera slides (311457). Fleming, Dr. Laurence E. (see Henry, Dr. Jean-Paul; Reddell, James R.; and
Wolff, Dr. Torben). Flint, Dr. Oliver S., Jr.: 778 insects (313340, 316550). Flynn, Shields: 6 genthelvite, Rhode Island (311387). Foord, Dr. Eugene: 22 corderoite, 1 vial (313007). Ford, Dr. James A.: 1 human skeleton missing right femur, Mississippi
Gittinger, Mr. and Mrs. J. Price: 15 native craft materials, Australia (313315). Gittins, Dr. John: 1 agrellite, Canada (315526). Codfriaux, Dr. Bruce L.: 9+ echinoderms. New Zealand (298189). Gold, Dr. D. P.: 1 wollastonite, Canada (311310). Gooding, Dr. R. U.: 58 crustaceans. West Indies (297650). Gordon, Dr. C. D.: 3 cicadas. North America (312019). Gordon, Gloria: 1 beetle and 1 caterpillar, Venezuela (313336). Goudey, Hatfield: 2 mineral lots (313743). Goulet, Henri: 29 ground beetles. North America (313691). Graham, Josephine L.: 4 embroidered clothing items, China (313673). Graves, Mr. and Mrs. Cecil: 8,500 mineral micromounts with catalog and
Grey, L. Paul: 506 butterflies and moths. North America (313319). Griesemer, Dr. Allan D. : 5 brachiopods, Wisconsin (311789). Griffin, Dr. W. L.: 19 minerals, Norway (309445, exchange); 1 wollastonite,
Norway (311353). Grosch, Kurt J.: 24 marine mollusks, Mozambique (312136). Guggenheimer, Mrs. Max: cricket basket, China (316264). Gunther, Lloyd: 4 slabs and 10+ specimens of fossils (313780, exchange); 4
Fleming): 34 crustaceans, 25 slides (295102, exchange). Hepner, Dr. L. W.: 261 leaf hoppers (313688). Herman, Dr. Lee: 4 beetles (316546).
Herman, Dr. Yvonne: 6 foraminifera slides, Arctic Ocean (312205). Herrmann, Dr. Scott J.: 67 flies, Colorado (311983, 316544, 316559). Hevel, Gary F.: 25,066 insects (312013).
Hickman, Dr. Carole S.: 2 marine mollusks, 13 invertebrate fossils (312963). Hindman, James R. : 1 whelanite, Utah (314043). Hobson, Mrs. Kay: 3 worms, British Columbia (313784, exchange). Hodge, Robert P.: 5 frogs, Washington (313397). Hodges, Dr. Ronald W. : 17 butterflies, Michigan (312683); 389 caddisflies,
Michigan (315241). Hodgkinson, Dr. Kenneth A.: 57 fossil scaphopods, Texas (312458). Hoffman, Dr. Richard: 19 stoneflies, Virginia (312020). Hopkins, Dr. Arthur H. : 5,000 invertebrate fossils, U.S.A. (310994). Houbrick, Dr. Richard S.: 150+ marine mollusks, British Honduras (311282). Houser, Mrs. Trudy: 1 aragonite, Arizona (310952). Hovore, Frank: 27 beetles. North America (316047).
Howe, William H. : 134 butterflies, Kansas and 29 butterfly paintings (316551). Hubbs, Dr. Carl: 11 marine mammals (316637, 316648). Hudson, Maxwell John: 4 minerals, Australia (315664). Hueber, Dr. Francis: 18 augite, Fiji Islands (315665).
Morris, Mrs. George Maurice: diamond and amethyst brooch (313916). Mrose, Mary: 1 mineral, Spain (313753). Muller, Joseph: 8 moths. New Jersey (316697). Murphy, Jack: 20 minerals, U.S.A. (315539). Nair, Dr. N. Balakrishnan: 29 marine mollusks, India (315744). Nawaz, Dr. R.: 1 killalaite, Ireland (311957).
Neidhoefer, James R.: 1,303 butterflies. North America (313681). Neufeld, John: 5 fossil wood specimens, Wyoming (314068). Neuman, Dr. R. B. (see Melon, Dr. M.). Neves, Richard: 1 caddisfly, Massachusetts (315231). Newell, Dr. Norman D. : 4,000 marine invertebrates, Tunisia (315212). Newell, Robert L.: 7 stoneflies (312022).
Nigrini, Dr. Catherine: 4 radiolarians, Arabian Sea (313963). Noffsinger, Dr. Estil J.: 3 cicadas, North America (311996). Norden, Arnold: 1 fossil turtle (310700); 19 crustaceans (311757, 313436). Norris, Dr. Kenneth S.: 5 marine mammals (316565).
Norse, Elliott A. (through Dr. A. B. Williams): 2 crustaceans, Florida (312355). Notzold, Dr. T.: 21 vials coal fruits, Germany (311787). O'Brien, Dr. Lois B.: 2 bees, nest and associated immature stages. Central
America (315276). Ofm, Dr. W. W. Kempf : 6 ants. South America (315238). Oliver, Dr. William: 1,120 invertebrate fossils, Europe (314722, 315671). Onyeagocha, Dr. Anthony C. : 52 dunite and chrome vein rocks, Washington
Patrick, M. Bordat: 123 beetles. North America (316227, exchange). Paul, Dr. Christopher R. C. : 6 invertebrate fossils, Indiana (313047). Peacor, Dr. Don: 1 cancrinite, Canada (311953). Pearson, Dr. M. J.: 1 siderite concretion, England (314313). Peck, Dr. Stewart B.: 3 beetles (311980); 11 lygaeid bugs (311987). Peel, Dr. John S.: 1 fossil gastropod, Scotland (311042). Perez-Farfante, Dr. Isabel (see Woodard, Bryan). Pescador, M. L.: 136 caddisflies, Chile (316052). Pessagno, Dr. Emile A., Jr.: 134 invertebrate fossil slides (313467). Peters, Daniel J.: 2 ostracod slides, Virginia (310864). Peters, Dr. William L.: 73 mayflies (313328). Petrey, Curtis: 8 calcite, California (313141).
Pieters, S.: 4 minerals, Africa (311022, exchange); 10 minerals, Africa (315179). Pinch, William W.: 14 minerals (310530, exchange); 3 minerals (312898). Pine, Dr. Ronald H.: 1 bat, Maryland (316563). Plath, Walter: 566 insects, Puerto Rico (307560). Piatt, Pamela: 1 fossil whale skull, Maryland (312672). Pletesch, Donald J.: 58 crustaceans, Mexico (310435). Poag, Dr. C. Wylie: 10 invertebrate fossils (313645). Poche, Richard M. : 34 rodents, Niger (316647). Pochek, Stephen: 1 stilbite. New Jersey (313756, exchange). Poorman, Leroy: 45+ marine mollusks, Mexico (310118). Povarennykh, Dr. A. S. : 15 minerals, USSR (313137, exchange).
Mexico (304730). Reeves, Mr. and Mrs. M.: 1 garnet, Utah (313742, exchange). Reiger, George: 1 seal skull (316638). Reimann, Dr. Irving G.: 481 fossil blastoids (311233). Reinert, Dr. J. F.: 1,933 insects. North America (312754, 313697). Rentz, Dr. David C. : 1,994 insects (315228).
Reynolds, John N.: 129 stoneflies. North America (312016, 313687). Ricker, Dr. WilHam E.: 2 stoneflies, Japan (316243). Ridding, Michael: 2 serandite, Canada (310805, exchange). Riddle, William: 2 invertebrate fossils, Tennessee (313037). Rimoli, Renato O.: 48 shrimp, Dominican Republic (310090); 25 land mollusks,
Dominican Republic (314846). Rios, Dr. Eliezer G.: 4 marine mollusks, Brazil (311540). Risebrough, Dr. Robert W.: 1 bird skin, Antarctic (316063). Roberds, Dr. Frances E.: 37 ethnological specimens, (316300). Robertson, Mrs. Anabel Graves and Wiggins, Mrs. Isabel Graves: 62
Sanders, Mrs. Arzada Brown: 4 pottery items (316266). Sanderson, Dr. Milton: 2 beetles. North America (315900). Sartenaer, Dr. Paul: 13 invertebrate fossils (313295, 315880). Sawyer, Dr. Roy T. : 1,000+ freshwater mollusks, 18 crustaceans, 2,091
Serna, Marco A.: 15 bird skins, Colombia (308535, exchange). Shea, Dennis: 24 minerals (312762). Sihvonen, John: 72 plants, Africa (311174). Simpson, Ronald D. : 43 brachiopods. New Mexico (311013). Sinkankas, John: 1 cut opal (315008, exchange); 21 minerals (315968). Sisco, Stephen G.: 1 plant, Oklahoma (312780). Slagle, Edward S.: 2 fossil mammal bones (315619). Smith, Dr. C. F.: 80 aphid slides. North America (316290, exchange). Smith, Dr. David R.: 311 sawflies, Brazil (312008). Smith, Frederick L. : 5 minerals, Africa (312896). Smith, F. L.: 1 serandite, Canada (315517). Smith, Joe B.: 1 chrysocolla, Utah (311381).
Snyder, Dr. Scott W.: 5 foraminifera. Gulf of Mexico (313864). Sohn, Dr. I. Gregory: 1 freshwater moUusk, Sweden (313649). Soini, Pekka: 50 snakes, Peru (311044).
Spangler, Dr. Paul J.: 558 insects. North America (312698, 313698). Spencer, Douglas R. : 10 polychaetes. New York (311447). Spilman, Theodore J.: 345 insects. North America (316307). Squires, Dr. H. J.: 25 crustaceans, Colombia (311375). Stanford, Jack: 25 stoneflies, Montana (312687).
Stansbery, Dr. David H. : 8 freshwater mollusks, Pennsylvania (311281). Stark, William P.: 1,773 insects. North America (311705, 312697, 315243). Steinberg, Stuart L. : 1 ceremonial human skull. New Guinea (309797). Steiner, Warren E.: 14 biting midges, Guatemala (314051). Steinmann, Dr. H. : 15 caddisflies, Argentina (316043). Stemler, Kathy: 6 insects, Puerto Rico (312011). Stewart, John: 1 genthelvite, Canada (310441). Stockton, Dr. William, Jr.: 1 dance mask, Bali (313667). Stockwell, Dr. Henry: 27 beetles (316865). Stone, Leonard Riley (through Baltimore County Police Bureau) : 1 human
Asia (316277). Tonander, J. F.: 3 cabochons (304858). Traub, Dr. Robert: 2,668 fleas. Worldwide (315100). Trinast, Beth Michele: 180+ crustaceans, 1 slide, California (308901). Triplehorn, Dr. C. A.: 6 beetles, North America (310300). Troup, Randy: 3 plants, Alabama (311632).
Truedsson, Ake: 10 minerals, Sweden (311911, 313741, exchanges). Tschernich, Rudy: 9 minerals and 2 vials, Oregon (313977). Tunnell, Dr. Wes: 200+ marine mollusks. Gulf of Mexico (312409). Turnbow, Robert H., Jr.: 148 beetles. North America (316048). Turner, Mr. and Mrs. Milton: 2 ivory carvings (313079); 1 watch, 1 pendant,
Villemarette, Mrs. Betty C. : 99 ethnological items, Africa (313272). Vitt, Laurie J.: 6 lizards, U.S.A. (312747). Vogel, John W. : 1,616+ crustaceans (271542, 294121). Vokes, Dr. Emily H.: 17 marine mollusks (312410, 315043); 21 fossil
Waller, Mrs. R. R.: 1 Indian pottery bowl and 1 blanket, U.S.A. (316038). Waller, Dr. Thomas R. (see White, James Seeley). Wangchuk, His Majesty Jigme Singye: 2 costumes, Bhutan (316297). Ward, Dr. Ronald: 3 land mollusks, Ethiopia (314015). Wasshausen, H. P. : 6 synthetic quartz (314038). Watkins, Dr. Julian F., II: 3 ants, Mexico (313320). Watson, Allan: 5 moths (314692).
Weber, Wilhelm: 2 plants. South America (312315). Weibezahn, Franz H. : 191 caddisflies, Venezuela (311989). Weidner, Dr. H.: 28 caddisflies, Peru (316041). Weinberg, James R.: 8 crustaceans, California (315525).
E. Kinsey (312382). Weske, John S.: 1 red squirrel (316646). Wetmore, Dr. Alexander: 8 fish skeletal elements, 20 mammal skulls and/or
Waller): 1 marine mollusk (312880). Whitehead, Dr. D. R.: 252 ground beetles. North America (312028). Wielgus, Ronald S.: 1,109 insects (311986, 313339, 313690, 314064, 316324). Wiggins, Mrs. Isabel Graves {see Robertson, Mrs. Anabel Graves). Wilber, David P.: 2 minerals (313075, 315019). Williams, Dr. A. B. {see Norse, Elliott A.).
Williams, Holly and Wright, Marian: 20 insects, Virginia (315095). Winters, Mary: 1 hydroxlapatite, Maryland (314312). Wolff, Dr. Torben (through Dr. Laurence E. Fleming) : 182+ crustaceans,
Denmark (295101, exchange). Wombie, Edgar A., Jr.: 1 nautiloid. North Carolina (315756). Womble, Edward: 22 echinoids (311947). Wood, Dr. Stephen L.: 4 stoneflies, Utah (316696). Woodard, Bryan (through Dr. Isabel Perez-Farfante) : 3 crustaceans.
New York (307640). Woodring, Dr. Wendell P.: 16 marine mollusks, Venezuela (310991). Worthley, Dr. Elmer G.: 2 arrows, Congo (315089). Wright, Eugenia I. and Eker, Helene: 270 mollusks (310860). Wright, Marian {see Williams, Holly).
Wyman, Donald G.: 155 minerals. North America (311379, 311388, 312757). Yancey, Dr. T. : 18 invertebrate fossils, Malaya (311716). Yenowine, Mr. and Mrs. Tom: 1 calcite, Kentucky (315667). Yepez, Dr. F. Fernandez: 18 insects, Venezuela (313625). Yerger, Dr. Ralph W.: 1 mammal skull and skeleton (316701). Yoder, Dr. Robert Lee: 55 invertebrate fossil slides, 19 slabs containing
John N. Rinne): 22 crayfish (297830). Arkansas State University (through Dr. George L. Harp) : 13 crustaceans
Individual: Stone, Leonard Riley). Bermuda Biological Station (through Dr. John C. Markham) : 50 crustaceans,
CaHfornia, University of: Berkeley Campus: 111 plants (312822, exchange); (through Dr. Roy L. Caldwell): 13 stomatopods, Thailand (307810); (through Dr. P. A. Opler): 20 botanical specimens, Costa Rica (311138); (through Dr. William E. Rainey) : 23 crustaceans, 3 mollusks (312493). Davis Campus (through Robert O. Schuster) : 242 scale insects (312338). Los Angeles Campus (through Dr. Hal Arnell) : 11 mosquitoes (312009); (through Dr. LouElla R. Saul) : 17 Cretaceous cymbophora and 3 casts (314132). Riverside Campus (through Dr. P. H. Timberlake) : 11 bees (311992); (through George W. Gillett) : 21 plants (314880); (through Laurel L. Walters): 65 crustaceans (313402); (through Barbara Voorhies) : 10 mollusks (311316). Scripps Institution of Oceanography (through Ray Bauer): 6 crustaceans, Mexico (314739); (through Dr. Richard H. Benson): 9 ostracodes (315063); (through Dr. P. K. Dayton): 2 asteroids, Chile (312418); (through Dr. Abraham Fleminger) : 15 copepods (305039); (through Dr. Patty Pauluso) : 50 macroinvertebrate taxa (314316); (through Dr. Larry Ritchie) : 6 copepods and 9 slides (305915); (through David Thistle) : 2 isopods (314765) {see also Donors to the National Collection, Individual: Barnard, Dr. J. L.).
California Academy of Sciences (through Dr. Paul H. Arnaud, Jr.) : 6 flies, Colombia (316288); (through John Chapman): 88 crustaceans, California (313035); (through Dr. Barry Roth): 1 pelecypod (313863).
California State College: Los Angeles Campus (through Dr. J. Henrickson) : 72 botanical specimens, Mexico (310324, 310325). Moss Landing Marine Laboratories (through Dr. Jack T. Tomlinson) : 1 crustacean, Honduras (294541).
California State University (through Dr. Ju-Shey Ho): 14 copepods (310069); (through Doyle A. Hanan) : 22 copepods (313134); (through Dr. Earl Segal) : 3 crustaceans (314155).
Canada Department of Agriculture: Central Experimental Farm: 413 cannabis (315802); (through Dr. Edward C. Becker): 1 beetle (316282); (through Gary Gibson) : 7 sawflies (314389); (through Dr. B. V. Petersen) : 1 blackfly (313498).
Centro de Investigaciones Marinas, Venezuela (through Dr. Aljadys Gonzalez): 1 marine mollusk (312455).
Administration (through James Bailey): 1 Minke whale (316649); (through Dr. C. Christopher Boucher): 3 crustaceans (312517); (through Dr. Isabel Canet) : 91+ crustaceans (313796); (through Dr. J. Lockwood Chamberlin) : 48+ worms, 1, 500 marine mollusks (310121); 15 mollusks (311491); (through Alexander Dragovich) : 45 crustaceans (312224, 313049); (through H. Arnold Karo) : 9 corals (256361); (through Dr. Richard B. Roe): 218 crustaceans (302545); (through Dr. Carl H. Saloman) : 3 crustaceans (314433, 315676); (through Gerald A. Sanger): 12 amphipods (305513); 500+ amphipods, 1 isopod (309966); (through Dr. Paul J. Struhsaker) : 1 stomatopod (311857); (through Dr. Joe Tashiro) : 22 crustaceans (299261, 298298); (through Dr. Austin B. Williams): 3 crustaceans (312474).
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO) (through Dr. E. B. Britton) : 3 beetles (311727, exchange); (through Dr. I. F. B. Common) : 3 butterflies (316045); (through Dr. J. C. Watt) : 2 earwigs (312693).
Defense, U.S. Department of: Department of the Air Force (through Col. John Carson): 74 reptiles and amphibians, Vietnam (303759); (through Capt. R. W. Clegern): 21 lizards. Phoenix Islands (313140). Department of the Army (through Capt. J. Abercrombie, T. Gaffigan, E. L. Peyton, and Maj. J. F. Reinhart) : 570 mosquitoes, Maryland (313695) : (through Mrs. Hu-cha Cho) : 83 midge slides, Korea (315091). Department of the Navy (through Tom J. Peeling): 5 crustaceans, California (315210); (through Capt. H. C. Sudduth) : 18 bird skins, Vietnam (278107); (through Dr. Peter Vogt) : 16 glassy basalt (311866).
Duke University (through Dr. C. G. Bookhout) : 3 crustaceans (314403); (through Richard B. Searles) : 42 algae (311572); (through Dr. Maximo Cerami-Vivas) : 744 worms (255045); (through Dr. Kirby Smith) : 3+ holothurians (302498).
East African Marine Fisheries Research Organization (through Dr. A. J. Bruce): 1 crustacean, Kenya (311888).
Protocetus (313862). Ege University, Turkey (through Dr. Ahmet Kocatas) : 2 crustaceans (311807). Elmore County Sheriff's Office, Idaho (through Earl Winter) : human skull
O. LeRoy): 2 foraminifera slides (311070). Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas e Biologicas de Botucatu, Brazil (through Dr.
Use S. Gottsberger): 19 plants (313533, 314185, 314916). Faculte des Sciences de Marseille, France (through Dr. Patrick M. Arnaud) :
Denmark): 1 thrips (316317, exchange). Florida Department of Natural Resources (through Dr. William Lyons) :
D. G. H. Halstead): 65 insects (316051, 316326). Great Lakes Biolimnology Laboratory, Canada (through Dr. David G. Cook):
Gulf Coast Research Laboratory (through Dr. Alfred P. Chestnut) : 1 crustacean (311074); (through Dr. William D. Burke) : 73 sea anemones (305669); (through Dr. C. E. Dawson): 57+ echinoderms (305237); 13 fishes (308522); 1,926+ crustaceans, 106 echinoderms, 50 marine mollusks (308881); 4 mollusks, 28 echinoderms, 2 worms, 216 crustaceans (313094); 253+ crustaceans, 1 worm, 3 mollusks (315292); 152 crustaceans, 19 worms (315724).
Hawaii, University of (through Dr. John W. Beardsley) : 7 mealybugs (316283); (through Dr. D. Elmo Hardy) : 69 fruit flies (315242); (through Dr. John Maciolek): 20 fishes (314809); (through Dr. Richard Young): 3 crustaceans (315011). Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology (through Wayne J. Baldwin):
Health, Education, and Welfare, U.S. Department of: Arctic Health Research Center (through Dr. Francis H. Fay): 1 fossil walrus skull (310701). Center for Disease Control (through Dr. Steve Bowen) : 17 mammals (316562); (through Robert G. McLean): 75 bird skins, 44 bird skeletons (312621).
Hogle Zoological Gardens (through Bernholt W. Palas) : orangutan (316641). Hong Kong, University of (through Dr. Brian S. Morton) : 57 crustaceans
Mitchell): 10 bamboos (311125). Hopkins Marine Station (through Dr. Donald P. Abbott) : 410+ crustaceans
Indiana University (through Dr. David G. Frey) : 3 crustaceans, 1 slide (313242); (through Dr. Frank N. Young): 19 water beetles (312701).
Institut D'Elevaga et de Medecine Veterinaire des Pays Tropicaux, France (through Dr. Lebrun) : 14 plants, Bolivia (314236).
Instituto Botanico, Venezuela: 4 plants (311652, exchange); (through Dr. Getulio Agostini): 294 plants (311563, 311590, 311613, 311615, 312227, 312811, 312861, 313528, 313549); (through Dr. F. A. Delascio) : 6 plants (311567); (through Dr. G. Morillo) : 64 plants (311628, 311635); (through Dr. Julian A. Steyermark) : 435 plants (311140, 311141, 311146, 311172, 311559, 311562, 311627, 312270, 312314, 312831, 313534, 313552, 313607, 314194); 70 plants (312317, 313525, gift-exchanges; (through S. Tillet) : 44 plants (312805).
Marino): 63 plants (311588, exchange). Instituto de Botanica Darwinion, Argentina (through Dr. Arturo Burkhart) :
Deconto Dombrowski) : 34 plants (311159, 312289, 314208, 314915). Instituto de Investigaciones Pasqueras, Spain (through Dr. R. Margalef) :
Saint-Brisson) : 105+ crustaceans (314046). Instituto di Biologia del Mare, Italy (through Dr. Brigitte Volkmann) :
Interior, U.S. Department of the: Bureau of Land Management (through J. W. Young) : 2 crayfish (290734). Fish and Wildlife Service: 374 bird skins, 56 bird skeletons (316700); (through Harvey R. Bullis, Jr.): 2,610+ crustaceans (232276); 1,750 echinoderms (257263); (through R. Bruce Bury): 30 reptiles and amphibians (313139); (through Jack L. Dean): 128 crustaceans (266244); (through Dr. Fred P. Meyer): 706 crustaceans (290206); (through Dr. Ramsey): 258 crustaceans (307033); (through Carl Saloman): 10 crustaceans (269790); (through Dr. Donald E. Wilson): 4,629 mammals (316645). U. S. Geological Survey (through Dr. John W. Adams): 3 minerals, 4 vials (313005); (through Dr. W. A. Cobban) : 142 ammonites, 3 pelecypods (310920, 310993, 311948, 314154); (through Dr. George A. Desborough): 2 mertieite (313154); (through Dr. Bruce R. Doe): 27 rocks (311764); (through Dr. Raymond C. Douglas): 9 fusulinid thin sections (315295); (through Dr. Richard C. Erd) : 2 minerals (311940); (through Dr. John Hanley): 10,000+ fossil mollusks (313644); (through Dr. Joseph E. Hazel): 50,000 fossil mollusks (313643); 200 fossil ostracodes (315895); (through Dr. Ralph Imlay) : 606 ammonites and bivalves (314805, 314406); (through Dr. Harry S. Ladd) : 19 barnacles (311358); (through Dr. J. D.
Asia (315208). Kansas State University (through Dr. T. M. Barkley) : 40 plants (314196). Kenyatta University College, Kenya (through K. W. Turgeon) : 4 crustaceans
Bruce W. McAlpin) : 142 ferns (315801). Los Angeles County Museum (through Dr. James H. McLean) : 3 marine
Miami, University of (through Martha B. Meagher): 3,200 plants (310337); (through Dr. Oscar T. Owre) : 1 bird skin (312641, exchange). School of Marine and Atmospheric Science (through Larry Abele) : 491+ crustaceans (296573); (through Dr. Frederick M. Bayer): 461 crustaceans (267410); 53 echinoderms (312749); 3 marine mollusks (314028); (through Phillip Heemstra) : 6 crustaceans (294928); (through Barbara S. Mayo) : 144 crustaceans (311209); (through Dr. Patricia A. McLaughlin) : 169+ crustaceans (306092, 306709, 311232, 312585); 1 marine mollusk (311283); (through Dr. A. H. Provenzano) : 75 crustaceans (256552); (through Dr. C. R. Robins): 1 fish (308429); (through Dr. Gilbert L. Voss) : 6 crustaceans (267897); 9,200+ echinoderms (296540).
Michigan, University of: Museum of Zoology (through Dr. Robert R. Miller) : 66 crustaceans (282944); 10 freshwater mollusks, 757+ crustaceans (311357);
Janet Bradfor) : 4 copepods, 2 slides (291952). Newark Museum (through Kenneth L. Gosner): 172 crustaceans (279465). Newcastle Upon Tyne, University of. Great Britain (through Dr. John Allen):
North Carolina State University (through Dr. James W. Hardin) : 51 plants (311617, exchange); (through Dr. Clyde F. Smith): 18 aphid slides (311362, exchange).
North Carolina, University of (through Dr. J. F. Matthews): 18 plants (310344); (through Dr. Edward F. Menhinick) : 3 fish (309440). Institute of Fisheries Research (through Dr. Frank J. Schwartz): 15 crayfish (313914); (through Dr. Austin B. Williams) : 2,015+ crustaceans (310561, 313797).
Rider College (through Dr. Mervin Kontrovitz) : 17 crustacean slides (314401). Rijksmuseum van Natuurlijke Historie, The Netherlands (through Dr. L. B.
William Lang): 6 crustaceans (314763). South Carolina Marine Resources Research Institute (through Dr. Frank W.
M. Cupka): 10 copepods (309713). South Florida, University of (through Dr. Robert W. Long) : 5 ferns (310391);
Chalumeau) : 5 beetles (315201, exchange). Sul Ross State University (through A. M. Powell) : 34 plants (313523). Summer Institute of Linguistics: 46 ethnological items, Ecuador (313670). Tel-Aviv University (through Dr. Al Barash) : 39 cephalopods (286809);
Dr. Emily H. Yokes) : 24 fossil invertebrates (315044). Tulsa, University of (through Dr. Albert P. Blair) : 2 crayfish (305421). Tuskegee Institute (through Dr. James D. Williams) : 134 crayfish, Alabama
Virnstein) : 40+ polychaetes (312632). Virginia State Library (through Dr. C. G. Holland): 2 lots human skeletal
Dr. Hugh litis): 48 plants (312815, 314884). Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (through Susan P. Garner) : 500+
Scheltema) : 5 marine mollusks (315521). Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center (through Dr. Geoffrey H. Bourne) :
Dr. and Mrs. Arthur Bloom The Bundy Foundation Dr. and Mrs. I. F. Burton Mrs. Adolph Coors III Dr. and Mrs. Burrill Crohn Mr. and Mrs. Henry H. Dewar Mr. and Mrs. Joel S. Ehrenkranz Mr. and Mrs. Benson Ford Mr. and Mrs. Walter B. Ford II
The Gilman Foundation Mr. and Mrs. John Davis Hatch Mrs. Percy C. Madeira, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Dan Oppenheimer Mr. and Mrs. Alger Shelden Mr. and Mrs. Mark Stevens Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Weinstein Mr. and Mrs. Robert Zell
Mr. Carleton Howe Mrs. J. Stuart Hudson Mr. Gilbert H. Kinney Mrs. Hannan Kraft Mrs. Leonard Levine Mrs. Stanley K. Levison Mr. Earle Ludgin Mr. Joshua Lincoln Mack Mrs. William Barton Marsh Mrs. C. Macculloch Miller Mrs. E. Bliss Parkinson Mrs. H. Darby Perry
Mr. David Pleydell-Bouverie Mrs. Dorothy H. Rautbord Mrs. Edwin M. Rosenthal, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Schoenith Mrs. Sidney L. Schwarz Mrs. A. A. Seeligson
Mr. and Mrs. Abraham AdIer John Winthrop Aldrich The Honorable Walter H. Annenberg Antiquarian Landmarks Society Inc.
Mr. I. Townsend Burden, Jr. Bonnie Cashin Mrs. John Carver Clarence House Cooper-Hewitt Collection Harrison Cultra Mrs. Peter Cusick Mrs. H. P. Davison Mrs. Elaine Dee Hope and Linker Delafield Mr. Donald Deskey Ed Polk Douglas Mr. Roy Fisher
Mr. and Mrs. Roy Frangiamore Friends of Drawings and Prints Friends of Textiles Mrs. Benjamin Ginsburg Mr. and Mrs. Hugh J. Grant Michael J. W. Green Mrs. R. H. Haldeman Mrs. John L. Handy, Jr.
Mrs. Margaret Carnegie Miller Mobil Foundation National Endowment for the Arts New York State Council on the Arts Mrs. Lucille Lortel Schweitzer Seamen's Bank of Savings Stroheim & Romann Bertrand L. Taylor III John B. Trevor, Jr.
County, New Hampshire Mrs. Curtice Hitchock Professor and Mrs. H. W. Janson Miss Mildred Jay J. Stewart Johnson Edward Kallop Mr. Robert Kaufmann John Kisek
Mrs. Richard S. Koehne Katherine Kosmak Mrs. William F. Lamb Dorothy Lieberman, M.D. Simon Lissim Mrs. William H. Mathers Mr. John Maximus Mayorcas Bros., Inc. McMillen Inc. Robert B. McTaggart Elinor Merrell Mrs. Richard Merrill Mrs. H. K. Morse Mrs. Gillian MacBain Moss Mrs. Edward L. Nesbitt Charles C. Patterson J. Van Ness Philip Mary Walker Phillips James Prestini
Dr. and Mrs. Joseph Sataloff of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: large silver candlestick (weight circa fifty pounds), which had been presented by Tsarina Catherine I to the Holy Synod in the Kremlin, Moscow, in 1726.
Mr. Alexander B. Klotz of New York, New York: important bed in mahogany, decorated lavishly with ormolu, and said to have been given by the French to Tsar Alexander I of Russia.
Miss Alice Dodge of Washington, D. C: large and rare gold medallion (22 carats) struck for the coronation of Alexander III in 1883.
Mr. and Mrs. Nat Bass Mrs. Nathaly Baum David Bourdon Mrs. Adelyn D. Breeskin Dr. and Mrs. Jack H. U. Brown Mrs. Ernest R. Bryan Mr. and Mrs. William Bulkeley Mrs. Barbara Christianson Jo Ann Clark Cooper-Hewitt Museum Allyn Cox Mr. Warren E. Cox Agnes Denes Mrs. Gertrude Dennis Edgar Douglass Werner Drewes
Arthur-Smith Corporation Ashland Oil, Inc. Bailey Coke Transport, Inc. Mr. Thomas J. Barta, President,
American Commercial Barge Line Company The Boswell Oil Company Mr. Arthur J. Brosius, Vice President,
Hall of American Maritime Enterprise — Cont. Crowley Maritime Corporation Mr. Bailey T. DeBardeleben,
Bailey Coke Transport, Inc. General Electric Company, Finance and Service Operation Gladders Barge Line, Inc. Mr. R. T. Goodwin, Jr., Executive Vice President,
National Steel and Shipbuilding Company Pacific Cargoes, Inc. of Washington, D. C. Mr. John Parker, Controller,
Bath Iron Works Corporation Propeller Club, Port of New York St. Lawrence Seaway Mr. Lynn B. Sherrill,
Farrell Lines, Inc. Tauber Oil Company C. J. Thibodeaux and Company The Tobacco Institute, Inc. Mr. Paul E. Trimble, President,
Gardner-Miller Fund: salt glazed bowl, England, circa 1750, in honor of Mr. and Mrs. Jack L. Leon's 50th anniversary (312076); and Syz, Dr. Hans: Meissen teabowl and saucer, circa 1735-1740 (313385).
Blick, Edward A.: 33 toy soldiers, toy horse (311859). Block, Albert and Ruth S.: 2 apparel display forms (313294). Blomquist, Dr. Olov A.: flexible gastroscope and Oak box (315417). Blumenthal, Sol and Deborah: 5 cookie cutters (312101). Bode, Henry W. : woman's dress, 1936 (308605).
Brown, Mrs. John B.: woman's dress, bodice, and overskirt, 1880 (313231). Brown, Roland: barbed wire (312731). Brown, Sandra L. : women's shoes, circa 1945 (312971). Broyles, Kenton H.: 2 hoods, 2 robes, Ku Klux Klan (312737); 7 political
Buchanan, Mrs. R. R.: 3 women's blouses, suit, hiking boots, shoes (309736). Buck, Mrs. Marion: necklace, brooch (307670). Bullowa-Moore, Mrs. Catherine B. : 70 ancient coins (312037); 3 storecards,
Lorraine T. Meyers): embroidered counterpane (314089). Cassady, Mrs. Robert Barr: prospecting cone (315133). Chambers, Mrs. Sam A.: man's knickers (309140). Chapin, Lavine A.: woman's dress, 1958 (309687).
Cheney, John T. : U.S. officer's chapeau, box, shoulder knots, headress (310071). Chokel, Bogomir: rubber miner's boots (314680). Clain-Stefanelli, Mrs. Elvira: 30 ancient coins (312064, 315401, 315405); sheet
Winifred Dillion: cap, apron, admittance ticket (308728). Dillon, Mrs. Alicia (see Bruns, Mrs. Marie). DiSalle, Honorable Michael V.: 4,304 political campaign objects, in memory of
III) : 3 bas reliefs of automobiles, 1926 (315451). Donohue, James J., Ill (see Donohue, Patricia Ann and James Joseph, IV). Dooley, Joseph H. : men's shoes (312890). Dougherty, Mrs. Charles E.: silent butler (311418). Douglas, Ben M. : 2 early San Francisco scrip issues (315123); American
Douglas, Mrs. Violet M. : paint box belonging to Archie Roosevelt (315316). Doyle, Bernard: converted rifle (307808). Drake, Thomas J.: officer's cap. World War II (313923). Draper, Mrs. Dorcas J.: woman's dress (308604). Drew, Eileen: 2 women's dresses (309725). Dring, Mrs. John P. (see Clark, Dr. E. Newton).
Dubie, Mrs. Eleanor Anderson: woman's dress, bodice, blouse (311498). Dull, Mary Louise: 10 items of apparel (309765).
World War II, in memory of Morris Calvin Dunmore (313924). Dunn, Arthur Wallace: book. Admiral George Dewey, 1899 (314640). Dunton, Gardner: metal block for bookplace, circa 1898 (310998). Durkin, Elizabeth and Helen: 139 items of dressmaking and trim (315126). Dyer, Lucille and Francis K. (through Emil Knoska) : rural mail box (315382). Dziedzic, Ben (through Mrs. Esther Dziedzic) : 19 medical science items
Emerson, William K. : uniform fatigues and accessories (314673). Engelbourg, Saul: men's Bermuda shorts (309081). Eno, Irene R. : women's dress, hat, and carry-all (309908). Erikson, Dr. Edwin B.: Jacquard woven coverlet (313384). Evans, Mrs. David: woman's black wedding jacket, circa 1906 (308577). Evans, Elliott (see Hale, Mrs. Crescent Porter). Evans, Timothy: man's jacket, woman's gloves (308578). Ewing, Mrs. Claude: woman's suit, 2 feather plumes, blouse, 1921 (309458). Exton, Mr. and Mrs. Fred: Mexican blanket (313934). Farber, Mr. and Mrs. Daniel: flowed portrait (314538). Farrar, Richard S.: Masonic medal (313350). Faucett, William R. : rural mail box (314535). Fauntleroy, H. E., Jr.: 2 campaign broadsides (315311). Fawcett, Mrs. K. F. : newspaper, 1835 (311820). Fesperman, John: sermon manuscript, 1847 (311464). Finn, Leonard H. : award medal (313376). Fitzgerald, Mrs. Margaret (through Sandra L. Diehl) : pocket notebook, 1876
Ford, Johnny: campaign photograph and inaugural address (314622). Ford, Richard L.: 60 World War II photographs (311869). Forrest, Stephen: Dalton adding machine, 1923 (314559). Fountain, Mrs. Leatrice: girl's pajamas, woman's evening dress (309408). Fowler, Mrs. Bodine S.: woman's evening dress, circa 1926 (313477). Fox, David: multiband radio receiver (312372). Freedman, Dr. Hyman M. : Parker sewing machine (314687). Freeze, Richard G.: Monroe desk calculator (311886). French, G. D. (through Ben L. Morse) : rural mail box (314629). Funke, Mr. and Mrs. Richard H., Jr.: 7 items of wearing apparel (312972). Furman, E. F.: enamel and diamond brooch (313299). Furman, M. William: enamel, pearl and diamond brooch (313298). Gateley, Mrs. Roy A.: woman's dress, purse, and stockings (309690). Gatter, Carl W. : 5 Centennial wooden medals, 1876 (302055). Gay, Connie B. : man's suit, shirt, and bow tie, 1956 (311817). Gaylord, Helen K.: crystal bowl, 1910 (315257). Geiser, Mrs. Grace.: 6 trade catalogs (315420). Geoghegan, William E.: Civil War artillery shell (311472); and Thomas,
Gray, Mrs. Anna S.: woman's hat, dress, and purse, 1954 (309678). Gregg, Mrs. David: 5 medals, opera glass, and daguerreotype relating to
Benjamin Pike (312744). Gregory, Seth C. : Bowie knife (313470). Greibach, Dr. E. H. : 7 medical science items relating to bone conducting
Hammer, Mrs. Jane Ross: woman's sweater, skirt and belt, 1950s (309909). Hamsen, John: ash tray (314529).
Hanft, Mrs. Margaret: men's shoes, circa 1920 (309077). Harding, Robert S.: men's swim suit and slacks, circa 1960 (309686). Haring, Mrs. Douglas G.: revolver, holster and 5 blank cartridges (310854). Hartenstein, Mrs. Jessie M.: 67 pieces of pressed glass (314606). Hays, Brig. Gen. Anna Mae: woman's wig (311946). Hebert, Mr. and Mrs. Raymond J.: 260 financial documents (312039, 312043,
Hedges, Mrs. Agnes B.: 5 religious paper cut-outs (314469). Helfrick, Susan K. (through Barbara J. Coffee) : 3 political phonograph records
Henderson, Kenneth W. : Japanese propaganda leaflet. World War II (310049). Henjes, Mr. and Mrs. George P.: women's drawers and 2 combinations
Hill, Mrs. Lida M. (through Edward Kohan) : ship model (312368). Hill, Peter: 12 window shades, seat covers, 16 wallpaper samples (313926). Himmelfarb, Dr. and Mrs. Morris H. : Meissen figure group, 1910 (314094).
Kainen, Mr. and Mrs. Jacob: impressions from pre-Columbian seals (312891). Kate, Marina: 10 pairs women's shoes and gloves (312203). Kavruck, Dr. Samuel: 17 medical science items (312611). Keally, James M., Jr.: 3 panes of commemorative stamps, 1946 (312716). Keller, Phillips Brooks: watch used by Helen Keller (314555). Kennedy, Mrs. Agnes M.: 3 identification tags with chain (313989). Kessner, Miriam Z., Estate of (through Gerald Edbrooke) : 41 Worcester
Lobkowicz, Mr. and Mrs. Martin G.: 11 women's apparel items (309945). Loomis, Mr. and Mrs. Fred: woman's dress and jacket, man's tie (313303). Looney, Charles T. G.: 4 scrip issued by iron companies (315113). Levering, Richard S., Jr.: 6 family documents (314667). Lucas, Phyllis: lithograph, reproduction poster, album of color etchings
Maclay, Mrs. Adele S.: medicine chest and dissecting microscope (315327). Mahoney, Charles: Marine fatigue jacket. World War II (311844). Makovenyi, Mrs. Nadya: ski poles (313214). Malis, Dr. Sol: bronze candelabra, 17th-century, Meerschum pipe bowl
McCutcheon, Mrs. Rheta 5.: leather boots, 19th-century (304356). McGee, Dr. Shanna J.: pewter plate (314470).
McGraw, Bessy J.: Grand Army of the Republic badge, 1937 (314076). McKeith, Bertha and Cleveland, Mrs. Emma McKeith: crocheted bedspread,
Nicolaides, Mrs. Martha Jane: calling card and handkerchief, 1904 (311421). Niesse, Mrs. Joseph H.: woman's suit, hat, blouse, and pin, 1940s (310518). Niles, Mrs. Maxine: eyeglasses, circa 1935 (310153). Norris, Mrs. Marion: wedding dress, slip, shoes, 1936 (309688). O'Bert, Wendy C: 40 insignia, medals and uniform items, in memory of
Lt. Col. and Mrs. John J. O'Bert (315407). Oldenburg, John: 9 photographs of carrousels (313810). Oliver, Mrs. Dorothy L. : English plate, 19th-century (314096). Orum, Mrs. Carolyn Nuessle: girl's coat and hat, 1932 (309676). Osborn, Orin O.: watch, shotgun, shell belt, and 21 shells (311476). Owen, David G.: Monroe calculator (311324). Packer, Mrs. Dorothy: woman's dress, 1929 (309685). Panciera, Mrs. Luigia (through Mrs. June Huggins) : 19 doilies (313706). Pangborn, Mr. and Mrs. John: woman's hat, 3 pairs of shoes, dress, and
Patton, Jr., while commanding in Tunisia and Sicily, 1943 (315337). Peerless, Dr. Sidney A.: 81 antislavery tokens and medals (315111). Pell, Robert: silk gown worn by Mrs. Grover Cleveland, photograph of gown
Post, Mrs. Marjorie Merriweather: Marie Louise diadem, 1810 (294384). Poulton, Mrs. Frank W. : racing ice skates (313652). Powell, Mr. and Mrs. Larry D.: girl's midi outfit, 1914-1915 (310124). Price, Mary: woman's suit, dress, 1900-1910 (313233). Price, Mr. and Mrs. Wiley R., Jr.: water wings, 1937 (309455). Prilik, Max R. : German coherer, circa 1904 (312937).
War II (311714). Reed, Mrs. Cloyce Cooley Campbell (see Campbell, Edwin Cooley). Rehwinkel, Mrs. Myrtle: 2 women's swim suits (309931). Revson, Mrs. Lyn: 33 ceramic cottages (315130). Ridenour, Frank: 13-star flag (314082).
Ring, Bernard: 3 commemorative First-Day covers (312729). Ripley, Dr. S. Dillon: 3 postage stamps, India (312068); 1 bronze
Shelley, Mrs. Mary Ford: woman's coat, shoes, 2 purses, 4 hats (310283). Sheridan, Philip H.: 8 coins. Great Britain, 5 U.S. medals, 1 storecard, in
Tarbet, Mrs. Jan F.: woman's suit and blouse, 1955 (309905). Taylor, Frank A.: Bicentennial medallion (313372). Terwilliger, Mr. and Mrs. H. Graves: pair of porcelain figures, 19th-century;
Meissen teapot and lid, circa 1730 (314092). Thode, Mr. and Mrs. Robert D.: man's suit, wallet, key case, shoes, suspenders,
Van Buskirk, James (see Kissinger, John R.). Van Deusen, John: pin box (314633). Vanembrugh, William C. : man's suit, 1941 (313306). Villastrigo, Edith: 7 anti-war posters, pennant, and ribbon (314623). Vinson, Mrs. Lucy M.: woman's suit, halter, slip, gloves, purse, necklace,
Roman coins (314567); 7 German family tokens (314570). Waibel, Mr. and Mrs. Philip G.: girl's dress, 1958 (309680). Waite, Mrs. Barbara (see Bradshaw, Lilyan B.). Wallis, Mrs. J. L. : 4-piece trousseau set, 1925 (308575). Warshaw, Mr. and Mrs. Harry: 25 pieces of coin glass, 2 commemorative
Weaver, Harry F. : cigarette lighter with profile of John L. Lewis (315452). Weinberg, Hanns: 3 porcelain pieces, circa 1755 (314660). Weissberger, Dr. Herbert B. (see Millett, Stephen C). Welch, Mrs. Yvonne M. : woman's boots, 1931 (312885). Wells, David L.: man's suit, shirt, tie, 1940 (313479). Wendt, Alma B.: 2 women's suits (309932). Whitcomb, Alan J.: original radio message sent from cinopac to Naval
Willis, Mrs. Minna: 13 women's costume and accessory items (309403). Willson, Kenneth A.: Japanese Army uniform (314597). Wilson, Rowland S.: 737 coins, tokens, and paper currencies (312033, 312055).
Reconstruction Aide cape (312935). Asesora Tecnica Filatelica, Colombia (through Mrs. Beatriz Pantoja de Gil) :
America (313511). Schmidt International, Inc., Oscar: ukelin with bow (312073). Silver Creations, Ltd. {see Lanello Reserves, Inc.). Singer Co.: 7 Friden calculators (313935). Society of Medalists (through Mrs. Mary Louisa Cram) : 3 bronze
Mrs. Charles C. Abbot: the papers of Charles G. Abbot Anthony J. Conway: National Zoological Park newspaper clipping file Mrs. Marguerite Kellogg: the papers of A. Remington Kellogg Society of Systematic Zoology: the records of the Society
Ripley, S. Dillon: Several historical and anthropological volumes. Sears, W. R.: Collected papers. Sheldon, Bert: Collection of Indian materials. Smith, Dr. Lyman: Several journals and monographs. Stathers, George: Rhode. Gates Flying Circus. Stewart, Dr. T. Dale: Several volumes on anthropology. White, John S., Sr. : Several volumes on geology. Zervos, Christian: 20 volumes on Pablo Picasso.
Bergman, Fred, Raraflora Nursery: Miscellaneous plant material. Collins, Mr. and Mrs. Lester: 20 authentic Victorian wickets.
Seibert, Dr. Russell J., Longwood Gardens: Tropical plant material. Studebaker, Russell: Miscellaneous tropicals. Tyler, The Honorable William R., Dumbarton Oaks: 2 trees of
Michel Monsour Ira S. Nordlicht Mrs. Donald Notman Christine O'Donnell Ann W. Pellerin Peter M. Pennoyer Mary Bryan Powell Ann Rice
Mrs. Nancy Barrett Mrs. Pat Costello Mrs. Fay Fletcher Mr. George B. DeGennaro Mrs. Mary E. Heimbach Mrs. Marion Hoppe Mrs. Carol James Mr. Carl Jones Mrs. Mary Lou Luff Mr. Jean Mackenzie Ms. Elizabeth McGarry Mrs. Mary Maus Mrs. Joyce Melocik Mr. John C. Phillips Mr. Brian K. Pierce
Mrs. Susan R. Pierce Mrs. Petricia Raabe Mrs. Isabel Shannon Mrs. Katie Simpson Mrs. Jane Smith Mr. Paul Spiess Mrs. Jeanie Steece Mrs. Judy Stembel Mrs. Gay Swofford Mr. Robert Taylor Mrs. Bernice P. Thorpe Mrs. Jane Anne Ward Mrs. Lois Windsberg Mr. Rick Feldman Mr. John Mercer
Mrs. Lillian T. Peterson Mrs. Carroll Pierce Mrs. Colleen Mathews Quick Mrs. Nancy P. Register Mrs. Ginny Reister Mrs. Ellen P. Richards Mrs. Barbara G. Riddell Mrs. Virginia 5. Roach Mrs. Barbara Roob Mrs. Beverly R. Rosen Mrs. Florence Saunders Mrs. Mary Jane Saylor Mrs. Clare Schweickart Mrs. Sarah S. Sears Mrs. Dolores A. Shaw Mrs. Gladys Sibbald Mrs. Winona Steed Mrs. Nan Stockman Mrs. Elizabeth Stockton
Mrs. Ann Suydam Mrs. Nancy W. Tartt Mrs. Patricia W. Taylor Mrs. Jeanne B. Teagarden Mrs. Kathryn G. Telep Mrs. Susan W. Torek Mrs. Cynthia Ullman Mr. Armand I. Vallieres Mrs. Edna Van Grack Mrs. Deborah M. Weigle Mrs. Mary Welch Mrs. Mike Wetzel Mrs. Carolyn Wilkinson Mrs. Patricia D. Willis Mrs. Bea Winne Mrs. Mary T. Winters Mrs. Eleanor Wolff Mrs. Linda Worthington Mrs. Betty Yassin
Conceived and implemented in 1956 by the distinguished scientist. Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Moonwatch was the first fully operational satellite tracking network. Accomplished through the efforts of hundreds of Volunteers around the globe (some of whom have participated for eighteen years), the establishment and success of this program is un- paralleled. Data compiled has been used regularly in the Smithsonian and international research programs, affording science a better under- standing of the upper atmosphere and the Earth's gravitational field.
SAO Moonwatch Volunteer Program- Mr. H. W. Northey Mrs. J. Northey Mr. Norton Novitt Mr. Stuart L. O'Byrne* Mr. Francis L. Ohmer Mr. Paul Olson Mr. Tiberiu P. Oproiu Mr. E. Otto Mr. J. Oudman Mr. M. D. Overbeek Mr. Alan Parkes Mr. Julian Parra Mr. Gordon Patston Prof. Edgar Penzel Mr. Calvin Perry Mrs. Betty Phelan Mr. Ray Pohl Prof. Calin Popovici Mr. John Prentice Mrs. Ardine Proctor Mrs. Eugenia D. Radu Mr. Fred Ream Mr. R. K. Reynolds Mrs. R. K. Reynolds Mr. Ernest Robart Mr. Gregory Roberts Prof. Jack Robinson Mr. Herbert E. Roth Mr. Diethard Ruhnow Dr. Philip W. Russell Mr. Maximo P. Sacro, Jr. Mr. loan U. Salajan Mr. Anthony Sanchez Mr. Eugene Sanchez Mr. Len Schaefer Mr. Gerhard Schiffner Mr. George Schindler Mrs. Betsy Schneider Mr. Ernest Schneider Mr. Jurgen Schramm Mr. James Schroll Mr. James Schumacher Mr. Donald P. Scott Dr. Herman C. Sehested Mr. Alexander Seidel Ms. Georgann Seibert Mr. P. C. Seligmann Mr. Richard Severinghaus Mr. Juan D. Silvestre Mr. Clifford Simpson Mrs. Goldie Sitzman
Nathaly Baum Jody Beck Anne Bergsman Alice Bindeman Danuta Boczar Frances Burka Dr. Morris Chalick Martha Jane Claypool Margaret Doole Nancy Dunston Frances Evans Lynn Fondahn Gertrude Friedman Freda Gandy Florence Gang Betty Gibson Ethel Gold Shirley Goldenberg Ms. Brent Goo Florence Hart Joclare Holmes Reba Immergut
Mrs. Frances R. Burdette Mrs. Horace Craig Mrs. John Eisenhour Miss Susan E. Hinckley Mrs. Esther H. Lurie
Mrs. Denton Blair Mrs. Huntington T. Block Mrs. Adelyn Breeskin Mrs. James M. Byrne Mrs. David Challinor Mrs. Joseph V. Charyk Mrs. Charles H. Clark Mrs. W. Montague Cobb Mrs. C. Burke Elbrick Mrs. Avery C. Faulkner Mrs. Robert Reed Gray Mrs. Karl G. Harr, Jr. Mrs. Parker T. Hart Mrs. Walter Hodges Mrs. Daniel W. Hofgren Mrs. Marshall Hornblower Mrs. Walter D. Innis Mrs. James Lehrer Mrs. Alexander C. Liggett Mrs. J. Noel Macy Mrs. Dudley Owen Mrs. James R. Patton, Jr.
Mrs. Charles H. Percy Mrs. Paul N. Perrot Mrs. Horace White Peters Mrs. Malcolm Price Mrs. Edward Rich, Jr. Mrs. S. Dillon Ripley Mrs. Reynaldo F. Rodriguez Mrs. John T. Sapienza Mrs. Hugh Scott Mrs. Brackley Shaw Mrs. John Farr Simmons Mrs. Potter Stewart Mrs. James W. Symington Mrs. Willard G. Triest Mrs. Robert D. Van Roijen Mrs. John Carl Warnecke Mrs. Paul C. Warnke Mrs. Edwin M. Wheeler Mrs. T. Ames Wheeler Mrs. Evan M. Wilson Mrs. Backus Wood Mrs. Laurcence I. Wood
Congress now appropriates about one hundred million dollars a year to maintain collections, to provide for their study and display, and to support other operations of the Institution. A much appre- ciated and generous figure indeed, but one which deserves a brief assessment. It is my suspicion that the collections of scientific mate- rials, art objects, books, and historical materials amassed by the Institution over the years, while obviously priceless to the nation in general terms, could be valued to surpass Mr. Smithson's original seed money of somewhat over $500,000 by a factor of at least ten thousand, or something between five and six billion dollars. If the annual interest on such a vast sum were to be reckoned as the appro- priate amount to be made available for collections maintenance and operations, it would be seen that our current levels of funds repre- sent about a third of what could prudently be spent without exceed- ing our income.
Rather, an answer to prayer has come from a Mr. Gerald M. Best of Beverly Hills, California, who all these years has preserved and lavished attention on "olomana," a donkey engine from the Island of Maui in Hawaii. Mr. Best has promised that he and his wife will give us "olomana," and so the final jewel has been placed in the diadem of the Museum of History and Technology's Department of Transportation, "olomana" will take her rightful place beside the great Southern locomotive, No. 1401, and the San Francisco Cable Car, and "pioneer," our oldest horseless, belching monster of the rails. It will be interesting to see if our curators can reconstruct the voice of "olomana," on tape, to ring out every so often, and amaze the children of all ages who throng the Hall of Transportation, and are so enraptured by the thunderous song of the Southern locomo- tive. That one has a wonderful taped voice including the word "bo — ard" among the roars, the pants, and puffs of the start-up, the shattering passage down the track, and the final mournful whistle echoing over the distant prairie at the end.
To measure all of the results of Mr. Smithson's bequest would be an impossible task, I feel. We can only suspect that nothing quite like the present Institution could have been foreseen, or even planned a hundred and forty years ago, when the Act of acceptance was finally passed and signed into law. No comparable set of cir- cumstances has existed in any other country. One of the joys of the creation of the Smithsonian has been that it inaugurated a vehicle by which the nation might be given things, and a way in which they might be accepted. Over the years the magnitude of the gifts — Smithson, Hodgkins, Sprague, Freer, Gallatly, the Walcotts, the Barneys, Dibner, Roebling, Mellon, Vetlesen, Winston, Link, Forrest, Bruce, the Ramseys, Reeves, Lilly, Becker, Johnson, Hirsh- horn, and Post — more than justifies the funds from various sources spent annually to keep them up. We must take all possible steps necessary to assure that what we now possess is well cared for and thoroughly catalogued, or else fail in our trust to the donors. We would otherwise fail in our responsibility to the Executive and to the Congress, and thus imperil the very mandate of 1846, that "all objects of art and of foreign and curious research, and all objects of natural history," etc. . . . "shall be arranged in such order and so classed, as best to facilitate . . . the study of them ... in the building . . . for the Institution." This is a charge which we are solemnly obligated to carry out with the help of the Congress, God willing.
This past year has brought sadness to the Smithsonian in the un- timely death of Under .Secretary Robert A. Brooks, scholar, poet, and expert administrator, whom we shall long mourn. Mr. Brooks had been with the Institution a scant five years, but had already endeared himself to his colleagues with his fair-minded outlook and good humor. Less than a year after joining the staff, we have also lost our Coordinator of Membership and Development, Lawrence E. Layborne, a valued new addition indeed. We shall miss his style and gentle spirit.
Dr. Kevin Sullivan has been appointed Director of the Chesa- peake Bay Center for Environmental Studies after serving for five years on that staff. He succeeds Dr. Francis S. L. Williamson, who decided to resign after a year's leave of absence in order to continue as Commissioner of Public Health and Social Services for the State of Alaska.
Mr. Edward F. Rivinus has been appointed Acting Director of the Smithsonian Press after coming to the Smithsonian from the United States Foreign Service and serving for a time in the area of Public Service.
To head Smithsonian employee health programs, Dr. Edward Belton has been appointed as Chief Medical Officer. Professor Herbert Gursky has been appointed Associate Director of the Center for Astrophysics (Optical and Infrared Division), Smithsonian As- trophysical Observatory. Among our affiliates, Miss Ruth Graves has taken the position of Director of Reading Is Fundamental, and Messrs. Donald Elliott and Harold Leuba have become Vice Presi- dents of the Smithsonian Science Information Exchange. Mr. George Packard has become Deputy Director of the Woodrow Wilson Cen- ter for Scholars to replace Professor Prosser Gifford, who has re- turned to Amherst College as Dean after a year's leave of absence.
Retirements this year included Dr. Waldo Wedel, Senior Anthro- pologist and distinguished authority on Indian archeology, from the staff of the National Museum of Natural History, and Dr. Helmut K. Buechner as Biologist from the National Zoo. Sadly, Dr. Buech- ner has recently died after a long illness. His ecological research studies, particularly of ungulates in East Africa, are classics in their field.
The board of regents met in fiscal year 1976 in the autumn, winter, and spring, as is customary. At the autumn meeting on Septem- ber 30, 1975, it was attested that Dr. John Nicholas Brown and Thomas J. Watson, Jr., had been reappointed as Citizen Regents. The Secretary reviewed the financial report of the Smithsonian and described the present schedule of the Bicentennial programs. Of par- ticular significance was the report that the National Air and Space Museum would be completed on time and that the costs for con- struction would be under the original estimate.
The winter meeting of the Board of Regents was held on Janu- ary 22, 1976. Special recognition was given to Mr. James E. Webb as an outstanding Regent and Chairman of the Executive Commit- tee. The financial report of the Institution was summarized by the
The Board of Regents determined that the Smithsonian Institu- tion is financially unable to operate Hillwood as a nonprofit museum under the terms specified in the Agreement between the Institution and Mrs. Marjorie Merriweather Post and therefore directed, in accordance with the provisions of Mrs. Post's will, that title to Hill- wood pass to the Marjorie Merriweather Post Foundation of D.C. on July 1, 1976.
In commemoration of the nation's Bicentennial, the Regents voted to award a number of medals to the following recipients for dis- tinguished achievement in areas of Institutional interest : The Smith- sonian Medal to Nancy Hanks, the Langley Medal to Grover Loening and James E. Webb, the Henry Medal to Dr. Martin H. Moynihan and Dr. T. Dale Stewart, the Matthew Fontaine Maury Medal to Dr. Robert M. White, and the Hodgkins Medal to Dr. E. Cuyler Hammond.
The designation of the "Doris and Henry Dreyfus Memorial Study Center" in the Cooper-Hewitt Museum of Decorative Arts and Design was approved in recognition of the contributions of Henry Dreyfus to the field of industrial design. The generous dona- tions of Mr. and Mrs. Henry J. Heinz II to the Cooper-Hewitt were underscored by the naming of the "Drue Heinz Study Center for Drawings and Prints." The Regents also approved the name "Waldo L. Schmitt Conference Room" for a room in the Invertebrate Zool- ogy area of the National Museum of Natural History in honor of Dr. Schmitt's outstanding contributions to invertebrate zoology.
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II of Great Britain during her July 1976 visit to the Smithsonian. Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and Secretary S. Dillon Ripley point out landmarks in a diorama that is part of the Bicentennial exhibition "The Federal City: Plans & Realities." Below. Their Majesties King Juan Carlos and Queen Sophia of Spain sign the guest register at the opening of the exhibition "Columbus and His Time," June 3, 1976, National Museum of History and Technology, as Mrs. Ripley looks on.
Emperor Hirohito of Japan, an ardent marine biologist, examines a marine specimen from the collections in the National Museum of Natural History during his visit to the Smithsonian in October 1975. With His Majesty are Dr. Frederick M. Bayer and Dr. Joseph Rosewater, curators at the Museum, and Professor Hidemi Sato of the Univer- sity of Pennsylvania, who acted as interpreter. Below. Emperor Hirohito and Empress Nagako of Japan and President and Mrs. Ford greet guests prior to the State Dinner held at the Smithsonian on October 3, 1975.
Generous support was also received during the year for the renovation of the Carnegie Mansion of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum. Due in great measure to a matching grant in this period from the Carnegie Corporation, as well as a gift from Mr. Henry J. Heinz II, the Museum was able to open to the public in October 1976. A welcome and specific bequest from the Estate of Dr. Ivy A. Pelzman allowed us to construct a glockenspiel in the National Zoological Park.
The Ford Foundation General Foods Corporation Hillwood Trust Mr. and Mrs. David Packard Estate of Ivy A. Pelzman The Rockefeller Foundation
Charitable Foundation, Inc. Doubleday & Company, Inc. The Dow Chemical Company The T. M. Evans Foundation EXXON Corporation Federal Barge Lines, Inc. Max C. Fleischmann Foundation FMC Foundation Ford Motor Company Gulf Oil Corporation Dr. and Mrs. Herbert Hawkes Mr. H. J. Heinz II The Higbee Company
Corporation S. C. Johnson and Son The J. M. Kaplan Fund, Inc. Samuel H. Kress Foundation Mrs. Edith MacGuire Richard King Mellon Foundation The Charles E. Merrill Trust Estate of Mr. William A. Mitchell Mr. Benjamin B. Morgan Mr. and Mrs. Thomas B. Morgan Philip Morris Incorporated Estate of Alfred Mussinan National Geographic Society New York State Council on the Arts Edward John Noble Foundation Northrop Corporation Occidental Petroleum Corporation The Ohio River Company Otis Elevator Company Pepsico Foundation, Inc. Pew Memorial Trust Pfizer, Inc.
Fund Mr. and Mrs. Bertrand L. Taylor III The Tinker Foundation The Tobacco Institute, Inc. Tupper Foundation Union Mechling Corporation United States Steel Foundation, Inc. University of Notre Dame Dr. and Mrs. Jeremy P. Waletsky DeWitt Wallace Fund, Inc. The Washington Post Water Transport Association Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr. The Weatherhead Foundation Wells Fargo Bank Western Union Corporation Matilda Wilson Fund Women's Committee of the
Mr. Frederick R. Adler AKC Fund, Inc. Aldine Publishing Company The Alvord Foundation Amax Foundation, Inc. American Can Company American Cyanamid Company American Institute of Marine
Island Ashland Oil, Inc. The Vincent Astor Foundation Avanti Motor Corporation Bank of America Foundation The Barra Foundation Mrs. Evelyn F. Bartlett The Bass Foundation Bath Iron Works Corporation Mr. Henry C. Beck, Jr. The Bedminster Fund, Inc. The Bendix Corporation Beneficial Foundation, Inc. Estate of Joseph Bernstein
Company Cables Electricos Ecuatorianos C.A. Mr. Robert P. Caldwell Canal Barge Company, Inc. Cargo Carriers, Incorporated Guy Carpenter & Co., Inc. Castle & Cooke, Inc. Caterpillar Tractor Company Central Telephone & Utilities
Corporation Centran Bank of Akron Champion Spark Plug Company CIBA-CEIGY Corporation City Investing Company Mr. Peter Clark Continental Bank International Mr. and Mrs. Kenneth W. Cooper Copernicus Society of America Corinthian Broadcasting Corporation Miss Dorothy Corliss Mrs. Rosemary B. Corroon Miss Nina J. Cullinane Mr. Nathan Cummings Royal Danish Embassy Mr. and Mrs. Ron Dante Dillingham Corporation Dixie Carriers, Inc. Joseph C. Domino, Inc. Mr. William W. Donnell Dravo Corporation Alice and Leonard Dreyfuss
Inc. The Griffis Foundation, Inc. Mr. Melville Bell Grosvenor Carter Hawley Hale Stores, Inc. Edith Gregor Halpert Foundation Hallmark Educational Foundation Mr. Armand Hammer The Honorable Averell W. Harriman Professor George W. Hilton Janet A. Hooker Charitable Trust Johns Hopkins University Hughes Aircraft Company Ingersoll-Rand Company Ingram Barge Company Interdisciplinary Communications
Associates, Inc. Interstate Oil Transport Company IU International The JDR 3rd Fund Johnson & Higgins Mrs. Ruth Cole Kainen Charles F. Kettering Foundation Mr. Irving Kingsford The Alice G. K. Kleberg Fund Estate of Nada Kramar
Inc. Lober Charitable Fund Mrs. Elizabeth B. Loch Mrs. John E. Long Mr. Joseph O. Losos S. C. Loveland Co., Inc. The Magowan Family Foundation,
Inc. Mr. and Mrs. William A. Marsteller Massey-Ferguson Limited Louis B. Mayer Foundation Chauncey and Marion Deering
McCormick Foundation Mr. Vasco McCoy, Jr. The Honorable George C. McGhee Mr. and Mrs. Eugene McHenry Mr. Robert S. McNamara Mr. Giles Mead Merck and Co., Inc. Mobil Foundation, Inc. Morgan Guaranty Trust Company Mote Marine Laboratory Mr. and Mrs. John Mudd National Maritime Union of America National Research Council Mr. and Mrs. John U. Nef New World Records Nissan Motor Corporation, U.S.A. Olive Bridge Fund Inc. Outdoor Advertising Association of
Inc. Pfizer International, Inc. The Pioneer Foundation Mr. M. P. Potamkin PPG Industries, Inc. Frederick Henry Prince Trust 7/9/47 Procter & Gamble Fund Propeller Club of Port Everglades
Propeller Club of Houston Propeller Club Port of New York Reynolds Metals Company Miss Esther M. Ridder The Ridgefield Foundation The Riggs National Bank of
Washington, D.C. Josephine C. Robinson Foundation Mr. Steven Rockefeller Madame Augusto Rosso Charles E. Sampson Memorial Fund Mr. A. A. Seeligson, Jr. Miss Gertrude Hochschild Sergievsky The Sidney Printing and Publishing
Fund Mr. and Mrs. Leonard L. Silverstein Charles E. Smith Family Foundation Sperry Rand Corporation The Seth Sprague Educational and
Charitable Foundation Standard Oil Company of California Stauffer Chemical Company Miss Elizabeth Stein Mrs. Matthew W. Stirling Stroheim & Romann Mr. and Mrs. E. Hadley Stuart, Jr. Mary Horner Stuart Foundation Sumner Gerard Foundation The Symonds Foundation Mrs. Carola Terwilliger Time Incorporated Todd Shipyards Corporation Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., Inc. Transportation Institute Mr. John J. Trelawney T.R.W. Foundation, Inc. Marcia Brady Tucker Foundation, Inc. Union Oil Company of California Upper Mississippi Towing
Association The Valley Line Company Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Waaland Mr. Richard W. Weatherhead Wedgwood Ellen Bayard Weedon Foundation
Company Mr. and Mrs. Robert Grant, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Edward Greensfelder Mr. and Mrs. W. E. Harvey Miss Gertrude Heare The Sidney L. Hechinger Foundation Mr. and Mrs. Frank C. Henderson Mrs. Amy E. Higgins Dr. J. Raymond Hinshaw
Port of the Twin Cities, Minn. Revlon International Corporation Mr. and Mrs. C. H. Risenpart Miss Eileen Rockefeller Mr. and Mrs. Samuel R. Rosenthal Mr. and Mrs. Donald M. Ross Mr. and Mrs. Rucker Ryland Honorable Herbert Salzman Dr. and Mrs. J. Albert Sanford Mr. and Mrs. Carl L. Selden
Weidenhammer Mr. Stephen Weil Mr. and Mrs. Herbert A. Whiting Mr. and Mrs. Howard C. Wiedemann Mrs. Anthony T. Wilson Mr. and Mrs. James A. Wise Mr. and Mrs. John O. Zimmerman
Founded a year ago by Dr. E. Richard Sorenson "as a means to forge beyond the too narrow view of the human condition as bio- logical organization or collections of artifacts," the National Anthropological Film Center is now taking advantage of the scholarly potential of the visual media to explore and reveal the range of human qualities and behavior in our diverse and changing world. Bridging science and the humanities, it draws upon the ma- terials and methods of both.
Research this year centered on Dr. Sorenson's Study of Child Behavior and Human Development in Cultural Isolates. As pat- terns of behavior and interaction take hold of and mold a growing child, they can reveal how basic human potential may respond to various conditions of life and how the patterned responses char- acteristic of a culture emerge.
Using techniques of phenomenological inquiry developed by Dr. Sorenson to obtain data suitable for study without first having to decide what might be important or significant, the Center is now examining child behavior and human development in isolated soci- eties in New Guinea, Brazil, Micronesia, Afghanistan, and Mexico.
With great freedom bestowed on them to explore objects and places at will, the Fore children of New Guinea reacted to unanticipated, new, or surprising occurrences by seeking bodily association with others — similarly to the way they learned new things as infants. To Fore infants and toddlers, this physical contact was a sanctuary of nurture and warmth, in which curiosity and in- terest could be safely maintained. Supplying cues to appropriate response, this sanctuary was also a retreat when the children's cognitive or response capabilities were overtaxed. Research film analysis by Dr. Sorenson showed this pattern persists throughout childhood. This pattern of response to the novel or unknown left the freely ranging young child relatively safe in his exploratory quests. His automatic reaction to novelty was to approach it in the company of a "more knowledgeable" hamlet-mate. (Photo credit: E. Rich- ard Sorenson)
In the spring of 1976, Dr. J. Kevin Sullivan was appointed Director of the Chesapeake Bay Center for Environmental Studies (cbces). Before joining the Smithsonian Institution in 1971, Dr. Sullivan spent seven years with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service in Michigan, where he was involved in environmental studies on the Great Lakes and the Mississippi and Missouri rivers.
Associate Directors for Science and Education were also appointed in 1976. Dr. David Correll, formerly a research chemist at the Smithsonian Institution's Radiation Biology Laboratory, was named Associate Director for Scientific Programs, and Dr. John
In addition to these baseline studies on the animal and plant com- munities of each site, Dr. Correll and his colleagues are beginning to examine the mechanisms underlying observed distributional patterns. Rates of nutrient depletion and pH decrease when land is abandoned from agriculture are being studied. An experiment in-
In addition to studies of the upland sites in the Rhode River Watershed, Dr. Patricia Mehlhop has also been conducting studies on small-mammal distribution at the Poplar Islands. Owned and ad- ministered by the Smithsonian, these small islands are located 2 miles off the Eastern Shore of Maryland, in the Chesapeake Bay.
In 1973, Dr. Mehlhop and Sheila Minor surveyed the islands for small mammals. They found mammal diversity and populations to be very low. Meadow voles were found on two Poplar Islands, and Norway rats were found on one. Later in 1973, the Norway rat became extinct. Interviews with past residents indicated that other mammals, such as squirrels and mice, had once inhabited Poplar.
Supreme Court and Chancellor of the Smithsonian Institution; Regents of the Smithsonian Senator Frank E. Moss, Mr. William A. M. Burden, Mr. Caryl P. Haskins, and Mr. James E. Webb; Senator Jennings Randolph, sponsor of the original National Air Museum legislation; the Right Reverend William F. Creighton, Episcopal Bishop of Washington; Mayor Walter E. Washington; and Dr. David Challinor, the Smithsonian's Assistant Secretary for Science.
The Ramsey Room furnishings are the gift of Juanita Gabriella Ramsey (1892-1966), who visualized this room as a memorial to her husband and to all persons associated with the science and art of flight. Admiral De Witt Clinton Ramsey (1888-1961) was one of the first naval aviators and holder of the Navy Cross. At one end of the room are portraits of Admiral and Mrs. Ramsey. The painting of the admiral is by the late Thomas E. Stephens; that of Mrs. Ramsey is by Gabriella Koszorus. At the other end of the room are three bronze medallion plaques representative of three forms of manned flight: aerostation (balloons and dirigibles), aviation (all heavier-than-air craft), and astronautics (space flight).
Artists Robert T. McCall and Eric Sloane were asked to decorate 2,100-square-foot walls in the Independence Avenue Lobby of the National Air and Space Museum. Mr. McCall painted The Space Mural: A Cosmic View and Mr. Sloane did The Earth Flight En- vironment. Because progress went so well on these murals, they became an important factor in the decision to preview the Inde- pendence Lobby area to the public beginning on February 2, 1976.
The Center for Earth and Planetary Studies played an important role in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp). The Research Director of the Center, Dr. Farouk El-Baz, was Principal Investigator for the "Earth Observations and Photography Experiment" on this mission. The objectives of the experiment were for the astronauts to make visual observations from orbit and to obtain photographs of specific Earth features, processes, and phenomena. The experiment was highly successful. A description of performed tasks and acquired data was published in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Preliminary Science Report.
One of the highlights of 1975-1976 at the Museum was the visit of Emperor Hirohito of Japan. The Emperor, who is a marine biologist, visited the Department of Invertebrate Zoology, where he spent over an hour in the privacy of a laboratory studying hydroid and mollusk specimens with the assistance of staff curators Dr. Frederick M. Bayer and Dr. Joseph Rosewater.
The Investigation of Marine Shallow Water Ecosystems project (imswe) is coordinated by nmnh's Dr. Klaus Ruetzler. He and the other scientists chose Carrie-Bow Cay as their study site because of
Aerial view of Carrie-Bow Cay, off the coast of Belize. This compact reef labo- ratory is the study site for the Investigation of Marine Shallow Water Ecosys- tems project. Below. Diver photographs underwater reef life at Carrie-Bow Cay. Right. Dr. Klaus Ruetzler, coordinator of the project, studies biological material recovered from the reef. (Photo credit: Kjell Sandved)
In addition to carefully mapping and photographing the reef, much of the early study has been devoted to an inventory and description of the reef's inhabitants. Samples of life have been systematically sampled from the various marine habitats off Carrie-Bow Cay and logged and distributed to specialists for iden- tification. Quite a few of the scientists participating in the pro- gram have made frequent scuba-diving descents into the reef and lagoon waters to do their own collecting, which they prefer because they can make underwater observations that give them clues as to how the organisms they are interested in relate to the total reef ecosystem. Among this group are Dr. Ruetzler, who has inventoried the reef's sponges; Dr. Thomas Waller, who is interested in Carrie-
Bow Cay's bivalves, particularly the scallops; Dr. Porter Kier, who has collected over twenty different kinds of echinoids in the island's lagoon and reef bottom; Dr. Ian Macintyre, who is studying the reef's coral rocks; and Dr. James Norris, who is investigating Carrie-Bow Cay's marine flora. Kjell Sandved, the Museum's bio- logical motion picture producer, documented all of this underwater work.
Many of the specimen collections made at Carrie-Bow Cay are now the basis for further studies. Dr. Ruetzler, for example, has been making electron microscope examinations of the blue-green algae within the cellular system of sponges, a study that illuminates the symbiotic process whereby an animal gets nutritious photo- synthetic products from plants. Dr. Norris is submitting his speci- mens of algae and seaweed to colleagues for chemical analysis in order to discover what alkaloid compounds these plants contain that protect them from fish and other plant grazers.
Other experiments by Dr. Macintyre are planned or are in progress. He and his colleague Dr. Walter Adey have drilled into the Carrie-Bow Cay reef substructure in initial attempts to recon- struct the historic development of the ecosystem. In another ongoing project, different types of coral plates, one-half to one-inch thick, have been spiked into the reef floor at different depths. Over a period of years these plates are expected to yield information on what types of boring organisms attack different corals and at what rate. Screened traps on upright plastic pipes record sediment ac- cumulation rates and biological data. In several cases a rare mollusk invaded a trap in its larval, free-swimming stage and established itself in the sediment, allowing Dr. Thomas Waller to make obser- vations of its growth.
Dr. Mary Rice is engaged in an intensive study of sipunculan worms that form burrows in dead reef coral and weaken its struc- ture. Her investigation seeks to determine what are the diversity and density of worms in the rock; if there are some types of rock into which they bore more readily than others; and how they do the boring, a process that is poorly understood because the worms do not make the holes when they are put under observation in a laboratory.
In 1972, Robert B. Jones was bulldozing irrigation ditches in a field on his ranch near Wray, Colorado, when he turned up a quantity of bones and stone points. Jones called in Jack Miller, a Colorado anthropologist, who examined the site and identified several hun- dred bison bones and a large number of Paleolndian stone and bone tools. This discovery set in motion a chain of events that led to a full-scale National Geographic Society-funded excavation directed by the National Museum of Natural History's Dr. Dennis Stanford, an archeologist who heads a program that is trying to throw light on the settlement patterns of early man as he moved from the Bering Straits to Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America.
The Jones-Miller site near Wray, Colorado, where 20,000 disarticulated bones of butchered bison were found. Dr. Dennis Stanford, archeologist with the National Museum of Natural History, directed the excavation, which revealed evidence of the presence of one or more groups of Paleolndians. (Photo credit: National Geographic Society)
In the scenario Dr. Stanford has reconstructed, the draw was filled with windblown snow. The hunters herded a group of bison into the draw's snowdrifts and as the bison floundered around, dispatched them from the edge of the draw with hand-launched spears. Then the bison were butchered on the site, with the snow acting as a freezing agent to keep the meat fresh until the job was completed.
At the Jones-Miller site Dr. Stanford uncovered intriguing evi- dence that these same rituals were practiced by the Plains Paleo-
The many similarities of the Jones-Miller hunt to the historical plains hunts have interesting implications. They suggest the existence of at least 10,000 years of socioreligious continuity on the northern plains, which would alter our theoretical concepts of the development of Plains Indian culture and the complexity of Paleolndian society. According to Dr. Stanford: "It is the first Paleolndian physical evidence we have ever uncovered that gives evidence of a high level of social organization. Early bison kills like this were generally assumed to be fortuitous happenings, but we can see from what happened at the Jones-Miller site that it was actually a highly complex, ritualized and planned event."
Dr. Samuel Johnson labored for six years over his famous dictionary and now Dr. Robert Laughlin, a cultural anthropologist at the National Museum of Natural History, after an even longer lexico- graphic effort, has had his The Great Tzotzil Dictionary of San Lorenzo Zinacantdn published by the Smithsonian Institution Press.
When he started the project fourteen years ago, Dr. Laughlin recalls that he was rashly confident he could swiftly complete it. He quotes in his dictionary's introduction a letter he wrote to his secretary in those sanguine days:
He was wrong. The book was not ready for press until 1973 and in that interval, Dr. Laughlin noted ruefully, the population of the 78,000 Tzotzil Indians had grown with "fearful exuberance" to
Dr. Laughlin began his study of the Zinacantec language in 1959. That year, he was invited as a Harvard postgraduate student to join Dr. Evon Vogt's Chiapas Project. He soon succeeded in learning the language and set about documenting Zinacantec folktales and myths. Completing a dissertation on this subject, and taking a job at the Smithsonian, he returned to Zinacantan, and after a year decided to undertake the task of compiling an extensive dictionary for the Chiapas project's use.
Most of the raw data for the dictionary was compiled between 1963-1967 with the help of two highly intelligent and articulate young Tzotzil collaborators, Romin Teratol and Anselmo Peres. Dr. Laughlin spent many months interviewing them in Zinacantan. He also brought them to the United States — to Santa Fe, New Mexico, and to his home in Alexandria, Virginia — where Tzotzil definitions were added for "such foreign elements as chaise lounges, which were promptly dubbed in Tzotzil 'foot watchers/ ' Identifica- tion of stars was made in visits to the Hayden Planetarium, and insects and larger animals not seen in Zinacantan were named dur- ing trips to United States museums and zoos.
Dr. Laughlin's collaborators become increasingly foot-weary as month after month was spent walking along trails through the mountainous Zinacantan region. The dictionary has five maps, showing the 1,000 place names that the collaborators pinpointed with the aid of aerial photographs and ground surveys. Ornitholo- gist Alexander Skutch went into the field and helped make sight identifications of scores of birds, and Dennis Breedlove, an authority on Chiapas flora, advised in the collection of more than 3,000 local plants. This part of the project was so successful that Dr. Laughlin began to worry that plants were going to engulf the whole dictionary.
As published, the dictionary is 598 pages long. The heaviness of the tome makes a mockery of the conventional wisdom that "primi- tives speak 'primitive' languages," Dr. Laughlin believes. For him the language has genius. Its musical cadences and complex phraseol-
One of the first things Dr. Hurd and his two collaborators, Dr. E. Gorton Linsley and A. E. Michelbacher, had to determine was which species of squash bee would be best to export to Hawaii. After studying the distribution, ecology, and behavior of the twenty-one species of squash bees ranging throughout Mexico and North America, they selected the species P. pruinosa because of its efficiency as a pollinator of almost all domestic Curcurbita plants and its proven ability to survive in a wide variety of climatic and topographical conditions.
Feeling that the trial introductions had worked out well enough to warrant going ahead with the Hawaii experiment, the three scientists enlisted the cooperation of the Hawaii and the California Agricultural Experiment Stations, and Dr. Toshiyuki Nishida and his associates of the Department of Entomology of the University of Hawaii. Dr. Nishida made local arrangements, including the locating of pumpkin plantings where the bees could be released.
Dr. Hurd and Mr. Michelbacher then flew a batch of captive bees to Hawaii and released them at designated sites in Hawaii and on the neighboring island of Oahu. These sites are now being moni- tored to see if breeding populations of squash bees will succeed in permanently establishing themselves.
Dr. Kurt Fredriksson is completing a decade of studies of the only major meteorite crater on earth that is directly comparable to lunar impact craters.
Unsatisfied with the scope of this investigation, Dr. Fredriksson, an authority on meteorites, suggested further tests. He knew that if Lonar was indeed a meteoritic crater, its situation in basaltic rock, which is similar to many lunar basalts, would give it singular sig- nificance. No other basaltic impact craters are known on earth, and samples of the Lonar crater would be of great value for com- parison with samples brought back from the moon by the Apollo missions.
The India Geological Survey concurred with Dr. Fredriksson about the importance of establishing the impact origin of the Lonar structure. In cooperation with the Smithsonian, the Survey began a comprehensive exploration program, including geologic mapping, drilling, trenching, and geochemical studies. The work began in 1970 and although not yet completely finished, it has established beyond a doubt that the Lonar crater was produced by a meteorite that hit the earth's surface perhaps less than 50,000 years ago (carbon-14 dating indicates an age of more than 30,000 years).
View of Lonar crater at Bulana, Maharashtra, India, where a meteorite ex- ploded. Dr. Kurt Fredriksson of the Museum staff is completing a decade of studies of this crater, which is the only major meteorite crater on earth that is directly comparable to lunar impact craters.
Dr. Fredriksson and his colleagues from the Department of Mineral Sciences, Joseph A. Nelen and Dr. Robert F. Fudali, and Dr. Daniel Milton of the United States Geological Survey, working in collaboration with Ananda Dube of the Division of Petrology of the India Geological Survey, analyzed the constitution of Lonar basalts, breccias, and glass ejecta, with an electron microprobe and compared them with stony meteorites and lunar materials. This work was supported mainly by the Smithsonian Foreign Currency Program and the Smithsonian Research Foundation.
Dr. Beryl B. Simpson is completing work on an International Bio- logical Program (ibp) comparative ecosystem study examining the generally held theory that similar communities can evolve in two widely separated areas with comparable rainfall, temperature, soil, and other conditions.
One theory holds that a high level of evolutionary convergence of form and process occurs in similar environments, and ibp sup- ported several programs that tried to produce ecosystem models on this assumption. But Dr. Simpson and her collaborators decided to test the theory of community convergence before accepting it as a basis for construction of models that would influence important policies of land use, management, and conservation.
Above, left. Representative plants of the Sonoran Desert near Tucson, Arizona. Below, left. Representative plants of the Monte Desert of northern Argentina. (Drawings by Alice Tangerini) Above, right. Dr. Beryl B. Simpson of the Museum staff examines a plant specimen on the Sonoran Desert in connection with a comparative ecosystem study.
Argentina. At these sites, Dr. Simpson investigated the similarity of plant-pollinator relationships and the breeding systems of the domi- nant perennial plants.
The thirteen dominant plant species were singled out in each of the desert areas (dominance was based on numbers and ground coverage). Dr. Simpson then set out to determine how the polli- nators interact with the plants; how much energy these plants apportion to nectar and flower production in order to attract pol- linators; and how many pollinators are supported by the plant community. To this end she collected data on floral structure and odor, blooming schedules, amounts of flower and nectar production, sugar concentrations of the nectar, amounts of pollen produced, and daily cycles of both nectar and pollen presentation.
Dr. Simpson observed that plants in North and South America depend on different major pollen carriers, invest different amounts of energy in flower production, and supply different amounts of nectar and pollen to potential animal pollinators.
Mollusks migrated into the Atlantic and Caribbean at the time these basins opened through seafloor spreading 150 million years ago. The evolutionary history of these animals over the next 90 million years is the focus of a study by Dr. Erie G. Kauffman.
By integrating his data with radiometric age determinations from volcanic ash falls preserved in sediments of these ocean basins, Dr. Kauffman can also measure variations on rates of evolutionary change. As expected, patterns and rates of evolution were found to vary widely between different types of organisms. Predictable vari- ances also showed up in single evolving lineages subjected to major changes in the Earth's environment.
But many unexpected evolutionary phenomena also emerged from these studies: nearly simultaneous, basically catastrophic ex- tinctions among diverse groups of organisms; periods of very rapid radiation of new forms; and remarkably fast evolutionary rates, at times producing a new species every 80,000 years within a single lineage. Dr. Kauffman believes these evolutionary changes are related to geologically cataclysmic events brought about by plate tectonics, seafloor spreading, and continental drift, and he suggests that this relationship clearly alters the concepts of evolution.
According to Dr. Kauffman: "Strict Darwinism holds that evolu- tion takes place slowly, through small changes over long periods of time, on a globe that was structurally and environmentally stable through time. It gives no mechanism for explaining periods of rapid evolution and massive extinction. But now we work with a different model of the Earth's crust and are beginning to realize that plate tectonic movements provide logical mechanisms for biological 'explosions' and 'catastrophes' that we see reflected in the history of fossil organisms.
Essentially, the history Dr. Kauffman has documented follows this pattern: global rise of sea level took place during times of rapid plate movements and oceanic ridge building, flooding much of the low continental areas of the world with shallow continental seas
National Museum of Natural History's Dr. Erie G. Kauffman examines one of the mollusks that he has collected for his studies of the past changes in the global environment. (Photo credit: Kjell Sandved)
Ornithological research at the National Museum of Natural History during 1975-1976 included publication of Birds of the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic (American Geophysical Union), by Dr. George Wat- son, the first comprehensive field identification guide to penguins, petrels, and other resident and vagrant birds of these areas. It is illustrated with color plates and black-and-white drawings by Bob Hines of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Sixty-seven birds are described in detail, with information on reproduction, molting, flight, habits, voice, display, food, predation, ectoparasites, habitat, and distribution. Numerous vagrants are covered in less detail. There is also an introduction to the Antarctic environment and directions on how to observe seabirds. The book is the culmi- nation of a project that began in 1963 when the National Science Foundation approached the Smithsonian Institution about the possibility of producing such a guide. Dr. Watson made three col- lection trips into the Subantarctic and Antarctic areas., surveyed all of the literature (dating back to Captain Cook) on the birds of the area, and examined specimens in major museum collections, includ- ing those at the Smithsonian gathered by the United States Explor- ing Expedition of 1838-1842 and Admiral Richard Byrd's United States Antarctic Service Expeditions of the 1930s and 1940s. One of the author's aims is to standardize the nomenclature for birds of that region, as well as suggest areas where further research is needed. He believes that his book would also benefit tourists who are now regularly traveling to Antarctica and previously had no really helpful guide to the birds of that area.
Dr. Richard Zusi continued his studies of the evolution of bark climbing in the tropical family Dendrocolaptidae. Members of this family, such as the Buff-throated Woodcreeper (not related to woodpeckers), feed along trunks and limbs, lifting mosses, poking into holes, and digging into cracks of the bark with their beaks. They support themselves with feet that are adapted for clinging and a spine-tipped tail that bends under their weight.
Dr. Storrs Olson edited the Collected Papers in Avian Paleontol- ogy Honoring the 90th Birthday of Alexander Wetmore, eighteen papers by prominent avian paleontologists. Dr. Wetmore's career at the Smithsonian spans more than half a century. Dr. Olson also made trips to Ilha da Trinidade (off the coast of Brazil), Hawaii, and Japan, collecting many specimens of fossil and recent birds for his studies of island paleofaunas and evolution of seabirds.
Dr. Richard Zusi (left) takes motion pictures of Woodcreepers in a Venezuelan cloud forest as his colleague, Dr. Paul Schwartz, lures the birds within range by playing their songs.
The Zoo's new glockenspiel is the imaginative gift of the late Dr. Ivy A. Pelzman of Washington, D.C. Its thirty-six bells, in three octaves, were cast in The Netherlands, and the tunes may be played either manually or electronically. Just below the clock a fiberglass lion, bear, elephant, and giraffe move when the hour strikes.
The Venezuelan field project in vertebrate behavior and ecology, coordinated by Dr. John Eisenberg, assembled valuable data concerning distribution, abundance, reproduction, and natural his- tory of selected species of marsupials, rodents, primates, reptiles, and birds. The studies were conducted by Dr. Eisenberg, National Zoo staff, and students in two quite different regions: the montane rainforest of Guatopo National Park and the seasonally inundated llanos on the ranch of Sr. Tomas Blohm.
In June 1976, Dr. Eugene Morton began to reintroduce on Barro Colorado Island several avian species which had become locally extinct. Seven song wrens and seven white-breasted wood wrens, trapped on the mainland, were transported to Barro Colorado, marked with bands, and released. Preliminary indications suggest that some of the reintroduced birds have established themselves on the island. The problem of local extinction in a biological preserve the size of Barro Colorado is of great theoretical interest since populations in small areas may be of extremely small size, and un-
The studies of South American canid social behavior and com- munication, conducted by Dr. Devra Kleiman at the Conservation and Research Center, were highlighted by the birth of two litters of crab-eating foxes. Both were reared by the mothers, and detailed observations of development were recorded for the second litter. At the same time, a maned wolf was born which did not survive. The female bush dog was artificially inseminated but the attempt failed, and a proven breeding male was sent on breeding loan from Los Angeles.
The Zoo was saddened in October 1975, by the untimely death of Dr. Helmut Buechner. His energy and enthusiasm successfully launched several projects dealing with the propagation of ungulates at the Zoo. He will be sorely missed.
In the past fifteen months since the Smithsonian was given full title to the Front Royal, Virginia, property, the Conservation and Re- search Center as a resource for research has grown. Dr. Eugene Morton of the Office of Zoological Research began two projects: the first concerns the nesting habits and population dynamics of the eastern bluebird; the second studies the movements and social organization of the turkey vulture using radiotelemetry. Dr. Dale Madison of McGill University in Montreal carried out a summer investigation in 1975 of the social use of space by two species of mice, the meadow mouse and the white-footed mouse. Dr. Christen Wemmer and Larry Collins began a three-year study of the social structure and behavior of the Pere David's deer; and in the summer of 1976 Kerry Malson initiated a one-year study of nutrition and pasture-carrying capacity, also on the Pere David's deer.
The use of the Zoo's library increased considerably in the past year, and a library technician was hired to provide more assistance to users. The generous gift of Dr. Helmut Buechner's journal col- lection filled many gaps in journal holdings and over 200 volumes were bound. Also this past year a good portion of library funds was used to develop the book and journal collection at the Con- servation and Research Center in Front Royal, Virginia.
A delegation from the Scientific and Technical Association of the People's Republic of China visited the Center for Astrophysics in October for a tour of the facilities and a discussion of current topics in astronomy and astro- physics. Dr. Edmond Reeves (left) describes the Harvard spectroheliometer that flew aboard the Skylab satellite. (Harvard College Observatory photo)
Silberglied is studying the function of color and pattern in insect communication and orientation. Of particular interest to him are the spectacular ultraviolet reflection patterns found on the wings of certain butterflies. These patterns, visible to insects (and by photography) but not seen by man, are characterized by some of the most intense and spectrally pure colors found in nature. Since different butterfly species that appear similar to us often have radically different ultraviolet patterns, and since the sexes within a species often differ from one another in this respect, there is potential for an elaborate and very subtle communication system. By changing the colors of living butterflies in behavioral experi- ments, Dr. Silberglied is attempting to unravel the mysteries of this language beyond the spectrum visible to man.
Dr. Gene Montgomery has also joined stri's permanent staff. Formerly employed by the National Zoo, Dr. Montgomery's re-
In an effort to further the development of a cooperative program with the Charles Darwin Research Station in the Galapagos Islands, Ecuador, Messrs. Rubinoff, Rand, and Borges visited there in No- vember 1975. Discussions were held on the establishment of a ma- rine laboratory and on the development of fellowships to encourage students to work in the Galapagos. Two stri scientists went to the Galapagos in August to initiate marine studies. D. Ross Robertson was interested in the problem of resource partitioning and competi- tion between damselfishes and surgeonfishes on coral reefs. In most coral reefs of the world, many species of both groups are found, but in the Galapagos only one species of surgeonfish is found as opposed to six species of damselfishes. During Mr. Robert- son's short trip, the patterns of spatial distribution, feeding habits, and interaction of these fish groups with the marine iguana were examined. The only marine lizard occurs there, and it is a herbi- vore probably competing with the fishes for food.
Drs. Moynihan and Linares left for Senegal in July 1976 for a year of field work. Dr. Moynihan will be looking at the behavior of squirrels and cephalopods, while Dr. Linares will be revisiting the Diola wet rice cultivators that she studied in 1964.
Her Majesty Queen Margrethe II of Denmark with Mr. Marvin Sadik, Director of the National Portrait Gallery, at the May 11, 1976, opening of the exhibi- tion "Christian Gullager, Portrait Painter to Federal America."
The Museum received major grants from the Johnson Wax Com- pany, Karastan Rug Mills, Carnegie Corporation, Mr. Henry J. Heinz II, and support from the New York State Council on the Arts and the National Endowment for the Arts.
Harold P. Stern, Director, completed a catalogue and book en- titled Birds, Beasts, Blossoms and Bugs, the Nature of Japan. The volume was prepared for an exhibition selected and arranged by Dr. Stern at the Frederick S. Wight Art Gallery at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Facing page, top. Presentation by Mr. Toyosaburo Taniguchi of his gift of Hokkai paintings to the Freer Gallery of Art, April 20, 1976. From left to right are Mr. Edward Noda, Secretary S. Dillon Ripley, Mr. Toyosaburo Taniguchi, Mrs. William Tanaka, Dr. Harold P. Stern, and Mrs. Mike Masaoka. Facing page, bottom. Her Majesty the Empress of Japan with Harold P. Stern, Director of the Freer Gallery of Art, on October 2, 1975. Above. Takashima Hokkai, Japanese artist (1850-1931). Right. Japanese painting Moon on the Lake, the Austrian Tyrol by Takashima Hokkai; colors on silk; hanging scroll. Gift of Mr. Toyosaburo Taniguchi. Accession No. SC-PA-27.
In fiscal year 1975, the Collection acquired a number of impor- tant objects, gifts from Mr. Toyosaburo Taniguchi, Professor Franz Michael, Miss R. K. Keith, Mr. Gordon H. Brown, Mrs. Marion Hammer, Mr. John Thacher, Dr. Kurt Gitter, Mrs. Elizabeth Reyn- olds, and the Estate of Edith Ehrman. Mr. Taniguchi's generous gift to the Study Collection consisted of ninety-five hanging scrolls by Japanese artist Takashima Hokkai (1850-1931). The scrolls are part of a suite of one hundred landscape paintings, entitled Hokkai Sansui Hyakushu. Mr. Taniguchi presented the paintings to the Freer Gallery in commemoration of the American Bicentennial. Secretary S. Dillon Ripley accepted the paintings from Mr. Tani- guchi at a luncheon in the Gallery on April 20, 1976.
Left, Photograph of Raphael Soyer shortly after his arrival in the United States in 1912. Mr. Soyer is one of the artists featured in the Hirshhorn's Bicenten- nial exhibition "The Golden Door: Artist-Immigrants of America, 1876-1976. (Photo credit: Raphael Soyer) Right. Soyer's Farewell to Lincoln Square, oil on canvas, 1959. (Photo credit: Joseph H. Hirshhorn Foundation)
A meaningful celebration of the nation's Bicentennial was a Museum priority in 1976. The combined efforts of the staff, guided by Curator Cynthia McCabe, produced the exhibition "The Golden Door, Artist-Immigrants of America: 1876-1976," a selective sur- vey of the immigrant-artist's contribution to the development and expansion of American culture. The comprehensive 432-page cata- logue, which contains an introduction by Dr. Daniel Boorstin, Li- brarian of Congress, and an essay by Mrs. McCabe, includes detailed information about the exhibition's content: 203 paintings, sculptures, architectural models, drawings, and photographs, rep- resenting 67 artists who immigrated to the United States from 23 countries. In addition, the catalogue includes a one-hundred-year
The first anniversary of the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden was celebrated on October 1, 1975. Among those present were (left to right) Mr. Joseph H. Hirshhorn; Mr. Abram Lerner, Director of the Museum; Vice Presi- dent Rockefeller; and Mrs. Hirshhorn.
As a further Bicentennial contribution to the understanding of American art, the ncfa mounted the first comprehensive exhibition of works by the nineteenth-century painter Emanuel Leutze and published a catalogue raisonne of Leutze's known works, compiled by Dr. Barbara Groseclose. The study revealed him to be a painter of great skill and national pride, who deserves to be remembered for more than his Washington Crossing the Delaware. Throughout the summer, "1876: American Art of the Centennial," a small but representative exhibition of works actually shown, or similar to those exhibited in the art section of the Philadelphia exposition of 1876, provided an opportunity to look back at the complexities that characterized art in that important year. The exhibit was or- ganized by Dr. Susan Hobbs.
In addition to exhibitions related to the Bicentennial celebration, the ncfa produced fourteen exhibits that continued its policy of investigating often neglected aspects or little studied assumptions of American art. The delightful and incisive work of Peggy Bacon, well known since the 1920s but sometimes overlooked by those more interested in the avant-garde, was presented by the Depart- ment of Prints and Drawings in an exhibition of 192 paintings, prints, drawings, and pastels. A 166-page publication, with an essay by Dr. Roberta Tarbell and a complete catalogue of Miss Bacon's prints, accompanied the exhibition. In cooperation with the artist's family, Janet Flint, Curator of Prints and Drawings, organized a major exhibition and catalogue of prints by Louis Lozowick, an artist of the 1920s and 1930s who in his theoretical writings and
Left. Partial view of the exhibition "Sculpture: American Directions, 1945-1975" at the National Collection of Fine Arts, October 10-November 11, 1975. Right. His Excellency Jose C. Cardenas (left), the Ambassador from Ecuador, with Dr. Joshua C. Taylor, Director of the National Collection of Fine Arts, at the opening of the exhibition "Americas: The Decorative Arts in Latin America in the Era of the Revolution."
Above. Original anatomical drawings by Leonardo da Vinci from the personal collection of Queen Elizabeth II were on display in the National Museum of History and Technology, July 2-August 1, 1976. Silvio A. Bedini, Deputy Director of the Museum, (left to right) and Secretary S. Dillon Ripley greet Sir Robin Mackworth-Young, Royal Librarian and Keeper of the Queen's Archives. Below. Mrs. Malcolm Fraser, wife of the Prime Minister of Aus- tralia, visits the Leonardo exhibition with Brooke Hindle. Director of the Museum.
Most notable among acquisitions important for their associations were a dress from the First Lady, Mrs. Gerald R. Ford; a campstool from George Washington's field headquarters tent; and jewelry and sewing accessories owned by Martha Washington. A tall case clock was acquired, made by Peter Hill, the first black clockmaker in this country. Herbert R. Collins, Associate Curator in the Division of Political History, attended both the Democratic and Republican National Conventions and collected valuable ephemera and political campaigning memorabilia for the already outstanding collection owned by the Museum.
Under the direction of Dr. Forrest C. Pogue, the Dwight D. Eisenhower Institute for Historical Research has been active in
The Institute co-sponsored with the United States Commission on Military History, the Ninth Quinquennial Conference of the Commission Internationale d'Histoire Militaire, which was held in the Museum in August 1975. Approximately one hundred and sixty historians attended, including sixty from twenty-six foreign nations; simultaneous translation of the proceeding was provided. Two related themes were considered: "Development of Military Techniques and Technology: Its Impact on Strategy and Tactics in the Period Before the Atomic Bomb," and "The Age of Revolution in the Americas During the 18th and 19th Centuries: The Military Impact on Society, Economics, and Technology." Dr. Philip K. Lundeberg, Curator of Naval History, served as program chairman.
In November 1975, at the General Douglas MacArthur Memorial Library, Norfolk, Virginia, Dr. Pogue participated in the first of a three-part series of seminars on the American military occupation and reconstruction of Japan and Europe after World War II. The second part took place in April at the George C. Marshall Research Foundation and the third will meet here in May 1977. In March 1976, Dr. Pogue and Colonel Griess contributed military history dimensions to a television series entitled "Transformations of American Society," presented by Bergen Community College and the Columbia Broadcasting System. Dr. Pogue served as consultant in developing the George C. Marshall Corridor at the Pentagon, opened by President Ford in April. Also in April, Dr. Pogue joined the executive committee that will supervise the large, statewide program of the Kentucky Bicentennial Oral History Commission.
In January 1976, at the request, among others, of Dr. Robert R. Kifer, Marine Sanctuaries Coordinator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (noaa), U. S. Department of Com- merce, the Eisenhower Institute sponsored a meeting in the Museum of representatives of interested public and private groups to assist noaa in developing a philosophical basis for its manage- ment of the recently created Monitor Marine Sanctuary. The sanc-
Dr. Sami K. Hamarneh, Historian of Pharmacy, participated in the International Symposium for the History of Arabic Science held at the University of Aleppo in April. He has been appointed editor of the newly established Journal for the History of Arabic Science, to be published in Syria. The Division of Postal History and Philately participated in the Seventh Annual Stamp Exhibition held in May at Philadelphia and was host to the annual congress of the Federation Internationale de Philatelie at the Museum in May.
Among the more important meetings of research scholars held in the National Museum of History and Technology was the Society for the History of Technology's eighteenth annual meeting, a special Bicentennial conference on "Two Hundred Years of American Technology," which met in October 1975. Major papers were presented by leading historians of technology. With more than one hundred and fifty registrants, everyone concerned con- sidered the meeting an unprecedented success. Dr. Melvin Kranz- berg, long-time Secretary of the Society, later remarked that "every part of the meeting turned out so successfully that we will be hard pressed to repeat this exhilarating event in the future."
In terms of special exhibitions, the past year has been a particularly active one for the National Portrait Gallery. "Portraits From The Americans: The Democratic Experience," based on Daniel J. Boor- stin's Pulitzer Prize-winning book, opened in November on the newly renovated third floor of the Gallery. This area has now been restored to the American Victorian Renaissance style in which it had been decorated in the 1880s following a fire in 1877 in the north and west wings of the building. "The Americans" was accompanied by a catalogue, illustrated with portraits and other related materials, and a text, supplementing that by Dr. Boorstin, written by Messrs. Beard, Voss, and Yellis of the Gallery's staff. The Gallery's final Bicentennial exhibition, "Abroad in America: Visitors to the New Nation, 1776-1914," opened in April. It was organized by Marc Pachter, Historian of the Gallery, who also wrote the introduction for the accompanying publication, which consisted of twenty-nine essays by foreign and American scholars and writers. This volume was co-edited by Mr. Pachter and Mrs. Frances Wein, the National Portrait Gallery's editor.
Battle at the Little Big Horn," prepared by Rick Beard of the Gallery staff to commemorate the one-hundredth anniversary of Custer's Last Stand, June 25; "Wedgewood Portraits and the Ameri- can Revolution," opened by Sir Arthur Bryan, the Chairman of Wedgewood, Inc., on July 12; "The Spirit of Fact: The Daguerreo- types of Southworth & Hawes, 1843-1862," organized by the Inter- national Museum of Photography, Rochester; and "A Knot of Dreamers: The Brook Farm Community, 1841-1847" and "The Coming of Age of American Music" (Ives, Gershwin, and Copland), which were conceived, respectively, by two Gallery interns, Miss Marni Sandweiss and Miss Anita Jones. All exhibitions were de- signed by Mr. J. Michael Carrigan, Chief, Exhibits Design and Production.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, former Prime Minister of Israel Golda Meir, Director of the Gallery Marvin Sadik, and Secretary S. Dillon Ripley at the luncheon held for the presentation of the Raphael Soyer portrait of Mrs. Meir.
A special presentation of a portrait of Golda Meir by Raphael Soyer, the gift of Mr. and Mrs. Nathan Cummings, Mr. and Mrs. Meyer P. Potamkin, and the Charles E. Smith Family Foundation, took place on December 19. The event was attended by Mrs. Meir and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, both of whom spoke. Another special presentation, a portrait bust of Henry A. Wallace by Jo Davidson, was made on January 20, the thirty-fifth anni- versary of Wallace's inauguration as Vice President. The bust was the gift of the subject's children, who were present at the ceremony, which was also attended by Vice President Nelson A. Rockefeller.
Above left. Thomas Cole, circa 1845, by an unidentified daguerreotypist. Gift of Edith Cole Silberstein. Above right. Benjamin Franklin, circa 1775, executed in laminated blue and white jasper from a wax portrait by Patience Wright, was loaned by Dr. and Mrs. Alvin Kanter for the exhibition "Wedgwood Portraits and the American Revolution," which opened July 14, 1976. Facing page. Left to right: Director of the National Portrait Gallery Marvin Sadik, the Duke of Northumberland, Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, and Secretary S. Dillon Ripley with a portrait of Thayendanegea (Joseph Brant), Chief of the Mohawks and Father of the Six Nations. The portrait was painted in London in 1789 by Gilbert Stuart and is on loan to the Gallery by the Duke of Northumberland.
The completion of the National Air and Space Museum led to the opening of a new, revitalized branch library, located in elegant new quarters, whose holdings were almost totally catalogued. Cata- loguing was accomplished in part through the Central Library's continued efforts to improve acquisition and cataloguing processes and make greater use of the cataloguing capabilities of the Ohio College Library Center (oclc). The institution was one of the first members of oclc, which links research and public libraries through- out the eastern United States by a computer network that permits the sharing of resources and, to a great extent, eliminates duplica- tion of effort. In cooperation with the National Museum of History and Technology, the Libraries also completed the transfer of the great manuscript and rare book collections donated by Dr. Bern Dibner, housed in newly completed temporary quarters.
Fairmount Park agreed to a one-year loan of the Foley Fountain that was the centerpiece of the Horticultural Hall. Within the "1876" exhibit, oh attempted to duplicate the horticultural and botanical extravaganza of the Centennial Exposition by installing eight 25-foot Cocos plumosa, ten 25-foot fishtail palms, and one 25-foot Ficus nitida, along with hundreds of small tropicals includ- ing mahogany, dracaena, dieffenbachia, crotons, and other varieties of plants that were known to have been in the displays in Horticul- tural Hall in 1876. A duplicate of the "Henry A. Dreer Sales Case," installed in the North Hall, contains replicas of dried flower bou- quets, immortelles, dried grasses, floral initials, pressed flower pic- tures, and other decorative objects known to have been displayed by the firm at the Centennial Exposition. These arrangements were researched and reproduced by the oh staff in conjunction with Ms. Sunny O'Neil of Washington, D.C.
Massive Victorian floral arrangements were provided in the "Castle" building for the visit of Queen Elizabeth II of Great Britain, and in the Arts and Industries Building for Mrs. Helmut Schmidt, the First Lady of the Federal Republic of Germany. Mrs. Schmidt was the first official visitor to the New Victorian Garden. Special floral arrangements were also provided for the many state visits made to the Institution during the Bicentennial year.
Above. Mrs. Helmut Schmidt, wife of the West German Chancellor, tours the Smithsonian's Victorian Garden during a two-day visit to Washington with her husband in July 1976. To the right of Mrs. Schmidt is Assistant Secretary for Museum Programs Paul N. Perrot and to the left is James R. Buckler, Chief of the Office of Horticulture. Below: Another view of the Victorian Garden.
Dr. Bern Dibner's gift of rare materials in the history of science and technology arrived from the Burndy Library in Norwalk, Connecticut. Among the nearly 8,000 volumes in the gift are hun- dreds of classical works, including 200 epochal books and pamph- lets, listed in the Burndy Library catalogue, Heralds of Science. The Dibner Library is located in a handsomely decorated room in the National Museum of History and Technology Building, and for- mally opened in the fall of 1976. Other notable gifts are listed in Appendix 9. As in previous years, the Libraries' collections were enriched by the many friends who donated books to the collections.
In June, July, and August 1975, an OESE-sponsored pilot program for summer interns brought twenty-two promising high school seniors from rural and inner-city communities to the Smithsonian to engage in learning service projects. The students worked under the guidance of curatorial and professional staff members in various parts of the Institution. One intern, Mr. Eric Seip, assisted in the dismantling of the Dunham School classroom, which is now a part of "A Nation of Nations" exhibition. In 1976, the Summer Intern Program had twenty-four participating students. A grant from the DeWitt Wallace Reader's Digest Scholarship Fund made this effort possible.
Left. Cover design to "Kin and Communities" program brochure featuring a lithograph originally published circa 1859 from the Smithsonian Collections. Right. Secretary S. Dillon Ripley and Mrs. Ripley welcoming Dr. Margaret Mead, chairman of the "Kin and Communities" program, to the June 1976 opening reception.
Published in the winter of 1976, in cooperation with the Associa- tion of American Publishers, the Bicentennial Guide to Book Selec- tion lists 3,000 titles and over 270 publishers and distributors. Mrs. Kathryn Lumley, one of the founding members of rif, compiled and edited the guide. As an author, reading consultant, and instruc- tor of reading and language arts for the Pennsylvania State Uni- versity of Continuing Education, she used her expertise to compile a comprehensive and successful guide.
In talking about rif's work, Mrs. McNamara is partial to what Jean Jacques Rousseau wrote in 1762 in Emile: "A . . . way that nobody thinks of, is to create the desire to read. Give the child this desire . . . and any method will be good."
Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Julian T. Euell presents certificates of appreciation and service pins to volunteers Dorothy Tull (right) and Josephine Olker at an awards ceremony and Christmas party honoring volunteer in- formation specialists. Next to Mr. Euell is Mary Grace Potter, Director of the Visitor Information and Associates' Reception Center.
Following the untimely death of Under Secretary Robert A. Brooks, the Secretary established a new position of Assistant Sec- retary for Administration, to which Mr. John F. Jameson, formerly the Institution's Budget Officer, was appointed, effective August 15, 1976.
Organizations reporting to Mr. Richard L. Ault, Director of Sup- port Activities, included the Management Analysis Office, Office of Equal Opportunity, Office of Computer Services, Office of Facilities Planning and Engineering Services, Office of Personnel Administration, Office of Plant Services, Office of Printing and Photographic Services, Office of Protection Services, Office of Sup- ply Services, Contracts Office, and the Travel Services Office. During the year, significant improvements were made in Support Activities toward providing quality and timely services. A Manage- ment by Objectives program, implemented in the previous year, continued to supply participative, results-oriented, objective-setting and review processes.
Mr. T. Ames Wheeler, Treasurer, continued his responsibilities for the financial assets and management of the Institution assisted by the Office of Programming and Budget, Accounting Division, Investment Accounting Division, Grants and Insurance Administra- tion Division, and the Business Management Office (which includes the Museum Shops, Product Development Program, and the Bel-
Former Secretary of State Dean Rusk (left) and Secretary of State Henry Kis- singer with "Peace" sculpture presented by the state of Georgia to the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars to mark the appointment of Mr. Rusk as a Trustee of the Center on April 5, 1976.
Fellows at the Center worked within three broadly defined scholarly divisions: Historical and Cultural Studies; Social and Political Studies; and Resources, Environment and Interdependence. A fourth division, the Kennan Institute.for Advanced Russian Studies, was established by decision of the Board of Trustees in December 1974, with former Center fellow George Kennan as head of its academic advisory group and Dr. S. Frederick Starr as its secretary.
In still another effort to serve a broader public, the Center is pre- paring to publish a series of Guides for scholars to resources in the libraries and archives, both federal and private, in the Washington area. Each Guide will be prepared by a scholar who has done re- search in some of the Washington collections. The Center has received a grant from the Morris and Gwendolyn Cafritz Founda- tion for the printing of four of the Guides. The first one, covering the resources for Russian and Soviet studies, by Dr. Steven Grant, assistant professor of history and international relations at George Washington University, was nearly completed in 1976. Other Guides on Africa, the Caribbean, Latin America, and the resources for the study of film and television are planned for future publication.
A glittering array of talent gathered on January 25, 1976, to honor Center-Chairman Roger L. Stevens in a "Bicentennial Salute to the Performing Arts." Among those who performed on the Opera House stage, before an audience that included President and Mrs. Ford, were Marian Anderson, Pearl Bailey, Carol Channing, Doug- las Fairbanks, Jr., Henry Fonda, Tammy Grimes, Robert Hooks, Judith Jamison, Priscilla Lopez, Martha Scott, Isaac Stern, Edward Villella, Allegra Kent, and Pinchas Zukerman. The gala perform- ance benefitted the Center's Performing Arts Programming Fund.
Under the chairmanship of Mrs. Polk Guest, the Friends now number nearly ten thousand from all fifty states and several foreign countries. Included in the membership are 300 active volunteers whose combined contribution to the Center totals nearly 80,000 hours each year. The volunteer office, which serves as a major in- formation and assistance center for visitors, is staffed 365 days a year from 9:30 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. More than 400,000 visitors par- ticipate each year in tours of the building conducted by volunteer guides. For the benefit of foreign visitors, tours are available in Spanish, German, Dutch, French, Italian, and Hebrew.
As President Ford and Bicentennial Commission Director John Warner look on, Japanese Prime Minister Takeo Miki presents a check for $3 million to Roger L. Stevens, Chairman of the Kennedy Center, to construct a 600-seat Studio Theater in the Kennedy Center. The Theater will be part of Japan's Bicentennial gift to the people of the United States and, in Mr. Miki's words, "a permanent and living link between our two cultures." (Photo credit: Wash- ington Post)
Other national gifts included a bronze and stone sculpture, Don Quixote, by Aurelio Teno, presented by King Juan Carlos I of Spain; a white porcelain relief by Inge-Lise Koefoed, presented by Queen Margrethe of Denmark; a 4,600-year-old alabaster vase from the government of Egypt, presented by Mrs. Anwar Sadat; and two tapestries, "Poem to Fire I and II," by Leonardo Nierman, pre- sented by the government of Mexico.
On October 5, 1976, President Ford announced the reappointment of Roger L. Stevens and Jack J. Valenti and named as new Center trustees Mrs. Howard H. Baker, Jr., Robert S. Carter, Orval Hansen, Mrs. Bob Hope, and John G. Spatuzza.
The National Gallery of Art, although formally established as a bureau of the Smithsonian Institution, is an autonomous and sepa- rately administered organization. It is governed by its own Board of Trustees, the statutory members of which are the Chief Justice of the United States, Chairman; the Secretary of State; the Secretary of the Treasury; and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, all ex officio; and five general trustees. Paul Mellon continued as president of the Gallery and John Hay Whitney as vice president. The other general trustees continuing to serve were Carlisle H. Humelsine and Dr. Franklin D. Murphy. In September 1975, Mr. Stoddard M. Stevens resigned after eight years as a trustee; Mr. John R. Stevenson of New York City was elected to succeed him.
The most noteworthy acquisition of the Library was the collection of nearly five hundred volumes belonging to Wolfgang Stechow and donated by Mrs. Stechow. More than 4,000 other books and pamphlets were received. The Photographic Archives acquired over 165,000 photographs, of which 108,869 were purchased through funds donated by the Samuel H. Kress Foundation.
Dr. Roger D. Abrahams, Chairman, Department of English, Professor of Eng- lish and Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712.
Dr. Milton W. Brown, The Graduate School and University Center, City Uni- versity of New York, 33 West 42nd Street, New York, New York 10036.
Dr. Reid A. Bryson, Director, Institute for Environmental Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1225 West Dayton Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53706.
Dr. Frederick H. Burkhardt, President Emeritus, American Council of Learned Societies, RFD 1, Bennington, Vermont 05201.
Mrs. Camille W. Cook, Associate Dean, University of Alabama School of Law, Box 1435, University of Alabama 35486.
Mrs. Anne d'Harnoncourt, Curator, Philadelphia Museum of Art, Parkway at 26th Street, P.O. Box 7646, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106.
Dr. Murray Gell-Mann, California Institute of Technology, 1201 East Cali- fornia Avenue, Pasadena, California 91109.
Dr. Peter C. Goldmark, Goldmark Communications Corporation, One Com- munication Plaza, Stamford, Connecticut 06905.
Dr. Frank B. Golley, Executive Director, Institute of Ecology, The Rockhouse, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30601.
Dr. David Hawkins, Director, Mountain View Center for Environmental Edu- cation, University of Colorado, 1511 University Avenue, Boulder, Colorado 80302.
Dr. Giles W. Mead, Director, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History, 900 Exposition Boulevard, Los Angeles, California 90007.
Dr. Ruth Patrick, Chairman of the Board, The Academy of Natural Sciences, 19th and Parkway, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103.
Dr. Gordon N. Ray, President, John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, 90 Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
Mr. Andre Schiffrin, Managing Director, Pantheon Books, 201 East 50th Street, New York, New York 10022.
Howard W. Lipman Harold O. Love Russell Lynes Richard Manoogian Porter A. McCray Abraham Melamed Mrs. Dana M. Raymond Edward M. M. Warburg George H. Waterman III S. Dillon Ripley, ex officio Charles Blitzer, ex officio
Dr. Margaret Mead, The American Museum of Natural History, New York. Mrs. Roma Crocker, Washington, D.C.
Dr. Jay Ruby, President, Society for the Anthropology of Visual Communica- tion, do Temple University, Philadelphia.
Mrs. S. Dillon Ripley, Orchidologist, Washington, D.C. Dr. Robert Read, Curator, Smithsonian Institution, Department of Botany. Mr. Paul Desautels, Orchidologist and Curator, Smithsonian Institution, De- partment of Mineralogy. Mr. James R. Buckler, Horticulturist, Smithsonian Institution. Mr. August A. Dietz IV, Greenhouse Manager.
August Heckscher Thomas C. Howe Mrs. Jaquelin H. Hume David Lloyd Kreeger Abram Lerner, ex officio Mrs. Doris M. Magowan Henry P. Mcllhenny Ogden M. Pleissner Harold Rosenberg Charles H. Sawyer Mrs. Otto Spaeth
Smithsonian Institution, ex officio. Dr. Lee G. Burchinal, Director, Division of Science Information, National
Inc. Mr. S. Dillon Ripley, Secretary, Smithsonian Institution, ex officio. Dr. R. W. Lamont-Havers, Deputy Director, National Institutes of Health. Dr. Charles W. Shilling, Executive Secretary, Undersea Medical Society, Inc. Mr. Alan D. Ullberg, Associate General Counsel, Smithsonian Institution. Mr. T. Ames Wheeler, Treasurer, Smithsonian Institution.
Peter Marzio. Mr. Audubon and Mr. Bien: An Early Phase in the History of American Chromolithography. 11 pages, 1 color and 1 black-and-white illus- tration. Reprint. November 15, 1975.
Virginia G. Drachman, Ph.D. candidate, S.U.N.Y., Buffalo. Nineteenth-century obstetrical and gynecological instruments, the catalogs advertising them and the papers of Dr. Chevalier Jackson, with Audrey B. Davis, Department of Science and Technology, from September 1, 1975, through August 31, 1976.
Thomas Andres, Bennington College. Successful Analysis of Forest Tree Populations, Dr. David Correll.
Rose Lee Armstrong, University of Pittsburgh. Primary Productivity in Grass- land Communities, Dr. John Falk.
David Burns, University of Virginia. Leaf Litter Production in Forest Com- munities, Dr. David Correll.
Bonnie Fauth, Utah State University. Outdoor Environmental Education Cur- riculum Development, Dr. John Falk.
Sara Nielsen, University of Michigan. The Federal Role in Non-Point Source Pollution Control, Dr. Kevin Sullivan.
Marc C. Percy, Stanford University. Alternative Strategies for the Preserva- tion of Agricultural Land, Dr. Kevin Sullivan.
Kimberly Jean Perry, Vassar College. Fecal Contamination of Soil in a Culti- vated Watershed, Dr. Maria Faust.
Thomas Powers, Anne Arundel Community College. Productivity of Lawn Grasses in a Man-Altered Environment, Dr. John Falk.
Donald A. Shute, University of Illinois. Leaf Litter Production in Forest Communities, Dr. David Correll.
The Honorable and Mrs. William A. M. Burden Mrs. Jackson Burke Mrs. Clara May Burns Mr. and Mrs. Harry W. Burns Dr. and Mrs. J. A. Burwell Mr. Marion B. Busch Mr. E. T. Byram Mr. Carlton E. Byrne Dr. and Mrs. Charles M. Cabaniss Mr. and Mrs. Carter Cafritz Mr. and Mrs. Leo A. Carten Mrs. Priscilla M. Christy Mr. Blake Clark Mr. and Mrs. Jerald L. Clark Colonel and Mrs. Russell C. Coile Mr. and Mrs. J. A. Corbet Mr. Stephen F. Crum Mr. and Mrs. David R. Dear Dr. and Mrs. Lewis H. Dennis General Jacob L. Devers Dr. and Mrs. Kevin P. Donohue Captain and Mrs. Robert F. Doss Mr. Alden Lowell Doud Dr. and Mrs. Joseph S. Drage
Foley Mr. Richard E. Ford Miss Helen E. Forshier Mrs. Rowland G. Freeman Mr. and Mrs. Arthur H. Fribourg Mr. William C. Frogale Mr. and Mrs. Geoffrey S. Fuller Mr. and Mrs. Arthur W. Gardner Mr. T. Jack Gary, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Roswell L. Gilpatric Mr. and Mrs. T. K. Glennan Mr. and Mrs. Henry H. Goldberg Colonel and Mrs. Julius Goldstein Mrs. Bette C. Graham Mrs. Katharine Graham Captain and Mrs. C. A. Grandjean Dr. Sheila H. Gray Mr. and Mrs. Kenneth M. Grubb Mr. John F. Gunnell Mr. and Mrs. Ernest V. Hallberg, Jr. Mrs. E. P. Hand Mr. Gordon Hanes Ms. Morella R. Hansen Mr. Thomas Hays Mr. and Mrs. John Heard Mrs. Judith B. Heimach Ms. Alverne S. Hellenthal Dr. and Mrs. L. M. Hellman Mr. Jeffrey L. Hendry Mr. and Mrs. William B. Hewitt Mr. Robert A. Hicks Dr. J. D. Hills Commander and Mrs. Robert M.
Hinton Mr. and Mrs. L. Hoffman Dr. and Mrs. John B. Holden Mr. Arthur A. Houghton, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. William R. Hunter Mr. Claude D. Hurd Mr. F. I. Hutchins Mrs. S. T. Inglish Dr. Glenn James Mr. David B. Jenkins Mr. and Mrs. Thomas E. Jenks Colonel and Mrs. F. M. Johnson, Jr. Mr. Daniel C. Kaye Mr. Harris L. Kempner
Levi Mr. George E. Lien Mr. Harold Linder Mr. Benjamin H. Long Mrs. John E. Long Ms. Genevieve Lukawiecki Mr. Frank R. Lyons, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Anthony J.
Marks Mr. and Mrs. Larry B. Marton Mr. Michael E. Mazer Mr. Donald L. McCathran Mr. and Mrs. Lacy McClain Dr. and Mrs. John J. McGrath Mr. Harold E. Mertz Mr. and Mrs. Alfred A. Michaud Miss Elizabeth Milbank Mr. and Mrs. E. Kirkbride Miller Mr. and Mrs. J. Edward Moore Mr. and Mrs. Carl J. Mulert Mr. and Mrs. James H. Muncy Mr. John F. Murphy Mr. C. Edward Murray, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Bruce Nelson Dr. and Mrs. Dwight Newman Mr. Thomas S. Nichols Mrs. John Nuveen Mr. Robert O'Brien Mr. and Mrs. Howard F. O'Neil Mr. and Mrs. Guyon P. Pancer Mr. Steven A. Pate Miss Ruth Uppercu Paul Mr. Louis Peller Mr. James P. Perry- Mr. Jack Peterson Mr. and Mrs. Donald A. Petrie Mrs. Charles E. Phillips Ms. Rae H. Pickrel Mr. and Mrs. Dwight J. Porter Mr. and Mrs. William M. Porter Mr. and Mrs. A. M. Prado Dr. and Mrs. Jerold Principato
Mr. and Mrs. William S. Weedon Mr. and Mrs. Stanley Westreich Mr. and Mrs. Peter White Mr. James L. Whitehead Mr. and Mrs. Donald E. Widmann Mrs. Vivian Wildman Mr. Julius Wile Mrs. David Wilstein Mrs. Mark Winkler Mr. and Mrs. Curtin Winsor Dr. and Mrs. Allan Y. Wolins Mr. and Mrs. Herman Wouk Mr. and Mrs. Samuel E. Zimmerman
Barnes Mr. and Mrs. Paul S. Bauer Mr. and Mrs. Martin E. Bayol Mr. Norman B. Belecki Mr. Thomas Bellinger Mr. and Mrs. James Bellows Dr. Jeffrey Berenberg Mr. L. Bergland Mrs. Thelma Berkley Mr. Samuel W. Bernheimer Dr. and Mrs. James F. Bing Ms. Jill S. Bixler
Mr. and Mrs. Charles Blackledge Mrs. Anthony F. Blanks Mr. Frank Bliss, Jr. Mr. Donn W. Block Mr. Robert F. Bodrogy
Bonsai Mr. Arthur S. Boraca Mr. Vincent B. Boris Mr. and Mrs. F. Borowsky Mr. John Henderson Boswell, Sr. Mr. and Mrs. Paul A. Bowles Mr. and Mrs. John Boyd Colonel and Mrs. John R. Boyd Dr. P. H. Boyer Ms. Eugenie Rowe Bradford Miss Evelyn W. Bradshaw Mr. Raymond A. Brady Dr. William L. Brannon, Jr. Dr. James C. Bray Mr. Edward T. Brooks Mr. and Mrs. Harold D. Brown Mr. J. James Brown Mr. and Mrs. Percival F. Brundage Mr. and Mrs. Frederick B. Bryant Mr. Jackson R. Bryer Mr. Donald J. Buckmann Mr. Edward P. Bullock Mr. and Mrs. James M. Burger Ms. Barbara Burklew Mr. Richard Scott Burow Mr. and Mrs. Robert L. Calhoun Mr. and Mrs. Edwin Callahan Mr. and Mrs. B. Cameron, Jr. Mr. M. Cane
Dr. Francis Caponegro, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Woolsey Carmalt Mr. Harvey Carmel Mr. and Mrs. Kenneth S. Carpenter Mr. Philip L. Carret Mr. and Mrs. Douglas H. Carter Mr. and Mrs. Edmund L. Castillo Mr. and Mrs. James C. Castillo Mr. Sabastino J. Castro The Honorable and Mrs. Henry E.
Catto, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Chackin Mr. and Mrs. James G. Chandler Mr. Joel Chaseman Ms. Gabrielle Choy Mrs. Harold W. Cheel Mr. K. Dexter Cheney Mr. Henry C. Christie Mr. and Mrs. Page B. Clagett Mr. Ludwig R. Claps Mr. Charles F. Cleland Dr. and Mrs. David G. Cogan Mr. Edward J. Cohen
Delaney Captain and Mrs. Victor Delano Mr. Howard Dellon Mr. Vinel E. Dent Mr. Wallace DeWitt Miss Patricia Anne Dick Miss Mary C. Dillingham Mr. R. Samuel Dillon, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. John Dimick Mr. and Mrs. Allen T. Dittman Mr. George A. Doole Mr. and Mrs. Tom Dooley Mr. James A. Dorsch Mr. David M. Dorsen
Durant Mr. Philip A. Dusault Ms. Elizabeth M. Earley Mr. and Mrs. John F. Early Dr. Anthony M. Eaton General and Mrs. Richard J. Eaton Mr. and Mrs. Theodore M. Edison Mr. Chester R. Edwards Mr. and Mrs. Robert B. Eichholz Miss Lynette F. Eltinge Mr. Pleasanton H. Ennis Mrs. Lionel C. Epstein Mrs. Philip H. Erbes Miss Ann E. Erdman Mr. Timothy Evans Mr. Henry Eyl Mr. and Mrs. Irving Feist Colonel and Mrs. J. J. Felmley Mr. and Mrs. Arthur R. Fillebrown Mr. I. Avrum Fingeret Mr. and Mrs. Thomas D. Finney, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. S. Greenhoot Fischer Mr. and Mrs. Joel H. Fisher Mr. Kenneth P. Fisher Mr. and Mrs. Ronald Fisher Dr. and Mrs. A. L. Fjordbotten Mr. Edwin F. Fleischman Mrs. Julius Fleischmann Mr. Harlan B. Forbes, Jr. Mr. Earl M. Foreman Mr. H. Jeff Fossett III Mr. John H. Foster Mr. Joel Burr Fowler II Mr. Mark Fox
Mr. and Mrs. Raymond R. Fox Dr. and Mrs. Irwin J. Fredman Mr. Gordon Freedman Mr. C. 5. Gardner Mrs. Virginia B. Garvey Mr. Zachary Paul Geaneas Mr. Jack Lewis Geller Ms. Frances A. Giacobbe Dr. and Mrs. Roy S. Gillinson Mr. John M. Goehner Miss Elinor Goodspeed Mr. and Mrs. Willliam Goshorn Mr. G. Gowans
Lieutenant General George E. Schafer Mr. and Mrs. Paul J. Scheips Mr. Robert J. Schemel Dr. Basil A. Schiff Ms. Penelope L. Schleifer Mrs. Julian L. Schley Mr. Kenneth P. Schmidt Mr. and Mrs. Jacques J. Schoch Miss Greta Schuessler Mr. and Mrs. John H. Schwartz Major and Mrs. T. E. Schwartz Mr. C. W. Scott Dr. Wayne Scott Mr. William R. Scott Mr. and Mrs. Gene F. Seevers Mr. and Mrs. Seymour M. Selig Mr. Lee C. Seligman Mr. F. L. Selvig Mr. Dan E. Shackelford Dr. and Mrs. Gordon T. Shahin Mr. John F. Shaw Mr. John D. Shilling Ms. Donna H. Shor Mr. Arthur Siebel Mr. and Mrs. Alexander W. Sierck Mrs. Ellen Hanna Simmons Mrs. Charles Simon Mr. Kenward L. Sims Colonel and Mrs. C. Haskell Small Mr. Benjamin M. Smith, Jr. Mr. Hugh Stewart Smith Mr. and Mrs. Joe P. Smith Mrs. Myron B. Smith
Mr. and Mrs. Larry Snodgrass Mr. and Mrs. Gerald Snyder Mr. and Mrs. Saul Snyder Mr. Robert W. Snyder II Dr. Marian A. Solomon Mr. Harold A. Soulis Dr. Daniel L. Stabile Mr. Richard W. Stafford Mr. Ronald A. Stanley Mr. Bruce E. Stauffer Mr. Stuart L. Stauss Colonel and Mrs. Harcourt M.
Stebbins Mr. and Mrs. Robert B. Stephens Mr. and Mrs. Jeffrey A. Stevens Dr. Serena Stier Mrs. Tegner M. Stokes Dr. and Mrs. K. A. Strand Mr. and Mrs. Richard L. Sugarman Mr. Charles A. Suter Mr. and Mrs. John R. Sutter Mrs. Mary Davidson Swift Mr. Gerald L. Swope Mr. Harry F. Swope III Mr. Curtis W. Tarr Miss Harriet J. Tatman Mr. Joseph M. Tessmer Mr. and Mrs. Robert C. Tetro Mr. and Mrs. Brian Thompson Ms. Linda R. Thompson Mrs. B. W. Thoron Mr. and Mrs. Sylvan M. Tobin Mr. and Mrs. Grover M. P. Tolliver Mrs. Stirling Tomkins Mr. Henry R. Traubitz Mr. Thomas T. Traywick, Sr. Mr. and Mrs. Lynn A. Trobaugh Mr. and Mrs. A. Buel Trowbridge Mr. John H. Turner Mr. George E. Tuttle Mr. and Mrs. Paul E. Tychsen Ms. Judith Falk Unger Mr. Anthony S. Vaivada Dr. and Mrs. Philip Varner Mr. and Mrs. Theodore J. Vass Mr. John M. Veatch Mr. John M. Venditti Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Vest, Jr. Mr. Wallace W. Voigt Ms. A. E. Wall Mrs. Elizabeth D. Walsh Mrs. Harry Wanger Dr. and Mrs. Henry P. Ward Mr. Michael J. Ward Ms. Susan C. Watkins
Wilkerson Mrs. Richard E. Wilkie Mr. J. Harvey Wilkinson Mr. and Mrs. Robert Willard Mr. and Mrs. Arnold Clarke Williams Mr. and Mrs. E. I. Williams Colonel E. J. Williams Mr. and Mrs. Paul J. Williams
Bartlett, Mrs. Bradford, Falls Church, Virginia: five Renaissance Revival chairs, table, mantle clock, Empire sofa, Morris chair, Rococo Revival sofa, plat- form rocker, dropleaf table, whatnot, gilded mirror.
Drysdale, Mrs. Robert M., Jr., and Mr. Lawrence Drake, Warrenton, Virginia: bronze card tray, six side chairs, two Savanarolla arm chairs, five Medieval Revival arm chairs and matching settee, pair marine paintings, carved chest, pair French vases, pair firescreens, tilt-top table, pair Neo-Greek pedestal stands.
Moody, Mrs. Ada C, Bethesda, Maryland: watercolor painting, Venetian mirror, two bookcases, dining table, pedestal stand.
Patterson, Mrs. Jefferson, Washington, D.C.: crystal table lamp, hatrack, Bohemian glass vase, pair watercolor paintings.
Balikci, Dr. Asen, University of Montreal: Film, Pashtoon Nomads of Afghanis- tan, 94,800 ft. Supported by the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Canada Council, and WGBH Public Broadcasting.
Crocker, Dr. William H., National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution: Film, Study of Child Behavior and Human Development among the Canela Indians of Brazil, 84,000 ft. Supported by the National Endow- ment for the Humanities.
Muller, Dr. Kalman, Guadalajara, Mexico; George S. Breidenbach, Chatsworth, New Jersey; and Karl Kernberger, Santa Fe, New Mexico: Film, Traditional Polynesian Dances of the Cook Islands, 21,050 ft. Supported by the National Geographic Society.
Staal, Dr. J. Frits, University of California at Berkeley, and Robert J. Gard- ner, Harvard University: Research Film Documentation of the Agnicayana Vedic Ritual in India, 28,000 ft. Supported by the Smithsonian Foreign Currency Program and the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Foundation Continental Bank International Mr. and Mrs. Kenneth W. Cooper Dr. William H. Crocker Miss Nina J. Cullinane Diamond Shamrock Corporation The Dow Chemical Company Eastern Air Lines, Inc. Mr. William L. Eury Dr. Richard H. Eyde Dr. Herbert Feinberg FMC Foundation Mr. Hamilton C. Forman Gem and Mineral Society of
Syracuse, Inc. Dr. Lee Gerhard Sumner Gerard Foundation Dr. Gordon D. Gibson Mr. Henry L. Greilsheim Frank B. Hall and Company
Adelseck, Dr. Charles G., Jr. (321192). Allen, Charles A. (320255). Allen, Dr. Robert T. (318290). Amli, Reidar (322448). Andrews, Dr. Fred G. (321239). Anthony, Dr. John W. (318593). Armstrong, Mrs. Pauline (319630). Ash, Dr. Sidney R. (318787). Ashby, Wallace (320973). Ashworth, Dr. Allan (317648, 318263). Bagnara, J. T. (see Frost, J. S.) Baker, James H. (319149). Balciunas, Joseph (322886). Ball, Dr. George E. (317633). Bamford, Maya S. (323163). Barber, Lorna (322923). Barbosa, Carlos (322147). Barclay, Dr. Harriet G. (321083). Barnard, Dr. J. L. (270357, 275759,
Fund Mr. and Mrs. E. Hadley Stuart Mary Horner Stuart Foundation Dr. William Sturtevant The Tinker Foundation Mr. John J. Trelawney Mr. Robert A. Vines
Blume, Richard R. (318260, 322885). Bolick, Mr. and Mrs. Glenn (318907). Bolli, Dr. Hans M. (321401). Bonar, Henry (323227). Boothe, Dr. Billy B., Jr. (317809). Boraker, Dr. David K. (317543). Bouchard, Dr. Raymond W. (316575). Boucot, Dr. A. J. (318218, 319511). Bourgeois, Dr. Feodor (322843). Bouseman, Dr. John K. (319441). Boyce, Richard F. (322220). Boyer, Dr. Paul 5. (317055, 320892). Brach, Vincent (321945). Brayfield, Mrs. Leila (320068). Brewer, George (319675, 322285). Brigida, Arthur A. (319608). Britton, James (318207). Brock, Dr. Julie Bailley (320479). Brooks, Dr. S. T. (Deceased) (134775). Brou, Vernon A. (319438). Brown, Betsy (319259). Brown, Dr. H. P. (319648). Brown, W. Chris (320344). Brownell, A. J. (318462). Brubacher, Mr. and Mrs. John
Chambers, Frank (322274). Chambers, Mrs. Shirley (318076). Chantal, Dr. Claude (319138). Chen, Mr. and Mrs. C. F. (323162). Chen, Dr. T. T. (318529). Child, C. Allan (292580, 311492)— see
Raymond B. Chin, Peter (318595, 318906). Choate, Paul M. (318472). Christensen, Carl C (320352). Clapp, Emory L. (320142). Clark, Prof. K. B. (318138). Clark, Hon. Lewis (322921). Clench, Dr. William J. (316919). Coetzee, Dr. Cornelius (318212). Cohen, Anne (315021, 321588). Coil, Clarence (320220). Cole, Dr. W. Storrs (322844). Colin, Dr. Patrick (321132). Collette, Dr. Bruce (317101). Conkin, Dr. James E. (319605,
Wood, Dr. F. E. Davis, Dr. & Mrs. Donald R. (321927). Dawson, Dr. C. E. (292580). De Marzo, Sr. Luigi (318190). de Meillon, Dr. Botha (321930). Derstler, Dr. Kraig (322938). Desfayes, Michel E. (292915, 315884). de Vasconcelos, Dr. Hortencia L.
Dhogbhidhuk, Sanga (199251). Dietz, Robert, IV (319145). Dippenaar, Nikko (321838). Dix, Dr. Michael W. (320477). Dmitriev, Dr. Leonid (318596). Dodrill, Jon (319116). Doherty, Dr. Peter (318182). Dombrowski, David (318069). Donoho, Rear-Adm. & Mrs. Glynn
Stanley). Eskin, Stanley (323171). Ethetton, Lee W. (318118). Evans, Clifford (322913). Everard, C. O. R. (317530). Everdell, Preston (320916). Eyer, Dr. John R. (320183). Fable, William A., Jr. (320067). Fair, Mrs. Ruth (317280). Ferguson, Dr. Douglas C. (319639). Ferguson, Meredith M. (323347). Ferreira, Dr. Antonio J. (317296). Figiel, Dr. & Mrs. Leo S. (322907)—
J.T. Frost, Dr. S. W. (320899). Frick, Jane (319597). Friedl, W. A. (320588). Funderburg, John B. (315931). Furlow, Capt. Bruce M. (319443). Gabelish, A. J. (316578). Gaebelein, Frank E. (322228). Gaedike, Dr. R. (322241). Gaines, Dr. Richard V. (316673,
Golini, Dr. V. I. (318246). Gombos, Andrew M., Jr. (322541) Goodrum, Dr. John W. (316922). Gordon, Linda K. (319228). Gould, Dr. Ed (319547). Govoni, David (322937, 322939). Grant, Dr. Richard E. (322799, 323273)
Brigida, Arthur A. Gressitt, Dr. J. Linsley (317128). Grew, Dr. Edward S. (321916). Griffin, Dr. W. L. (318763). Griffith, Mrs. Eugene (Deceased)
Heck, Cathern A. (322221). Hedges, Frank R. (322234). Heinrich, Dr. E. William (321602). Heisterberg, Jon F. (316866). Heltne, Dr. Paul (323193). Henderson, Dr. Edward P. (248505)—
Hatfield, Jack J. Herring, Dr. Jon L. (319150). Hess-Distel, Dr. Hans (318202). Hettrick, David R. (321887). Hevel, Gary F. (323362, 323368). Hickman, Dr. Carole S. (318203). Higgins, Dr. Robert (321547). Hills, Dr. L. V.( 321544). Hobbs, Dr. H. H., Jr. (266300, 272610,
Mrs. Mary and Zardini, Rinaldo. King, Robert Merrill (321036, 321313). King, Vandall T. (321603). Klemm, Dr. Donald J. (322563). Klima, Prof. Bohuslov (322222). Knez, Dr. Eugene I. (322229). Knez, Mrs. Jiae Choi (322226). Knopf, Kenneth W. (322569). Knowlton, Dr. George F. (322230,
Kudenov, Dr. Jerry D. (321194). Kuzirian, Alan M. (322097). Kwapiszewski, Hon. Michael (322920). Kyte, David J. (322206). Ladd, Dr. Harry (317688). Lago, Paul (323179). Lamb, Cathy L. (318088, 318454). Lampert, Col. Lester L., Jr. (320992). Lane, Dr. H. Richard (317056). Lane, Robert A. (323366). Langford, Patricia S. (320603). Larochelle, Andre (319136). Larsen, Dr. Arne Rosenkrands
Ruth. Lutze, Dr. Gerhard F. (318786). Lynch, Dr. J. F. (317645). MacDougal, John M. (317701). Maier, Bruce (317538, 318132, 319618). Maizels, Dr. Albert D. (320172). Makin, David (320938). Mallack, Dr. J. (318245). Malone, Mrs. Elsie (316871). Manders, Edward A. and Mark
Canning, Mrs. Harold E. Morse, M. Patricia (319108). Mortensen, Kim (322156). Moyer, Raymond T., Esq. (322914). Muir, Dr. Robert (322233). Murphy, Jack (320128).
Wendy; Moree, Montague. Rouse, Dr. E. P. (322242). Rucker, Dr. J. B. (318437). Ruetzler, Klaus (318379). Ruffino, Sally M. (322918). Ruibal, Rodolfo (318862). Ruiz, Olivia (321319). Russo, Ronald A. (305795). Sabrosky, Dr. Curtis W. (320117,
Fosburg, Dr. F. R.). Sage, Walter E., Ill, (319521). Sahama, Dr. Th. G. (318908). Sainfeld, Dr. P. (318042).
Sakae, Dr. Toshiro (318531). Sato, Dr. Masataka (320903). Saul, John (321601, 323233). Schaffner, Dr. Joseph C. (319636,
Paul). Shmakin, Dr. B. M. (315971). Shulman, Mr. and Mrs. Will (318602). Siddons, Derek C. (320535). Sihvonen, John (315776). Silsby, Scott (319673). Simkin, Dr. Thomas E. (307669). Simmons, Ed (318761). Simmons, Melva (323375). Simons, Anna (319606). Sinkankas, John (322207). Skoglund, Mrs. Carol (305349). Slater, Dr. James A. (319147, 321944). Slifer, Dr. Eleanor H. (323351). Smith, Dr. Gordon L. (319806). Smith, Wendy (316101). Smith-Evernden, Dr. Roberta K.
Larson, R. Sterling, Gerhard (321029). Stevens, Dr. Calvin H. (318911). Steyskal, George C. (317649). Stinchcomb, Dr. Bruce L. (316152).
Stockwell, Dr. Henry (318473). Stokes, Dr. Darrell R. (321250). Stone, Dr. M. W. (323182). Stormer, Dr. J. C. (317547). Strong, A. M. (Deceased) (89777). Stuart, Mr. and Mrs. Hadley, Jr.
Dr. Terry L.). Whitmore, Dr. F. C. (317804). Whitmore, Tom (321208). Wielgus, Ronald S. (318466, 319634,
Dan. Williams, Holly (317652). Williams, Jesse M. (323168). Williams, Dr. Sidney (320122). Wilson, Charles S. (319629). Wilson, Donald E. (302253). Wilson, Mrs. Martha S. (283876). Wilson, Wendell E. (311537). Wimmer, Howard R. (318461). Wing, Dr. Bruce L. (318455). Wingert, Gene (322272). Winters, Mrs. Mary (322275).
Mr. Albert J. Ades Mr. and Mrs. Denton Anderson Mrs. Wendell W. Anderson, Sr. Mr. and Mrs. Wendell W. Anderson,
Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Louis C. Baker Mr. Richard B. Baker Mr. W. N. Banks Mrs. James H. Beal Mr. and Mrs. John A. Benton Mr. and Mrs. James A. Beresford Mr. and Mrs. Edwin A. Bergman Mrs. Rosalie Berkowitz Mrs. Lionel R. Berman Muriel M. Berman Mr. and Mrs. James Biddle Anna H. Bing
Mr. and Mrs. Theodore D. Birnkrant Mr. and Mrs. H. Glenn Bixby Mrs. Myron N. Blank Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence H. Bloedel Mr. and Mrs. Paul Borman Mr. William Bostick W. H. Brady Foundation, Inc. Mr. Charles L. Bricker Mr. Louis Britwitz Mr. and Mrs. Joseph G. Butler Mrs. David R. C. Brown Mr. and Mrs. William W. Brown Mr. J. Lawrence Buell, Jr. Mrs. Helen R. Busch Mr. and Mrs. E. A. Cafiero Mr. Dixon H. Cain Mr. and Mrs. Howard B. Camden Dr. and Mrs. Sidney E. Chapin
Program Milka Iconomoff Mr. and Mrs. Michael Irving Mrs. Harrison Ivancovich Dr. and Mrs. David Jacknow Mrs. Augusta Jacobson Mr. and Mrs. Earle F. Johnson Mr. and Mrs. Henry C. Johnson Mr. and Mrs. Alfred Winslow Jones Mrs. Louis E. Kahn Mr. and Mrs. A. Frederick Kammer Mrs. Virginia W. Kampf Mr. and Mrs. Jacob M. Kaplan Miss Zelda Kaplan Mr. and Mrs. Seymour Karbal Mr. and Mrs. Bernard Karpel Mr. and Mrs. Sidney Katzman Mr. and Mrs. James O. Keene Mr. and Mrs. Martin A. Kellman Kennedy Galleries, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. Harry L. Koenigsberg Kriendler-Berns Foundation Mrs. Roger Kyes
Mr. and Mrs. John L. Bunce Mrs. Carrigan Fitzsimons Miss Elizabeth H. Fuller Mrs. Alfred C. Harrison Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Hirshhorn Mr. and Mrs. J. S. Judd
Mr. and Mrs. Robert L. McNeil, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Richard Manney Mrs. Nancy B. Negley Mr. and Mrs. Dan Oppenheimer Mrs. H. Darby Perry Mrs. Herbert Polacheck Mrs. Edwin M. Rosenthal, Jr. Mrs. Arthur S. Seeligson, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Maury L. Spanier
Company The Vincent Astor Foundation Margaret T. Biddle Foundation Mrs. Elizabeth C. Booker Mrs. Helen W. Buckner CBS Inc.
Carnegie Corporation Mr. and Mrs. Ron Dante Mr. William W. Donnell First National City Bank Eva Gebhard-Gourgaud Foundation Hallmark Educational Foundation Henry J. Heinz II Harold K. Hochschild Janet A. Hooker Charitable Trust Patricia Kendall Hurd IBM
Connecticut, Hartford Mr. Alfred Auerbach Mrs. Lillian Block Bergdorf-Goodman Brunschwig & Fils, Inc. Mrs. Lester R. Cahn Chestnut Renewal Corporation,
Board of Directors Dr. and Mrs. William Collis Mrs. M. Allison Coudert Mr. Harold Crooks Dansk Designs, Ltd. Mr. Uri Danyluk Mr. David de Casseres Mrs. Elizabeth de Cuevas Mr. Rodman de Heeren Mrs. Rogers Denckla Mr. Donald Deskey Mrs. Ann Hysa Dorfsman Dundee Mills Mrs. Susanna Ebendorf Mrs. William B. Eldridge Mr. Dennis A. Fiori Mr. M. Roy Fisher Marguerite Flynn Shin Ichiro Foujita Estate of Jerome A. Q. Franks Friends of Drawings and Prints Friends of Textiles Mrs. Frederick Greenfield Mrs. Robert Grieff
Rockmeadow Foundation, Inc. Charles E. Sampson Memorial Fund Stroheim & Romann Mr. Bertrand L. Taylor III John B. Trevor, Jr. The Women's Committee of the
Colorado Mr. William A. Olsen Mr. Hubbell Pierce Mrs. Minna Rosenblatt Mr. Max Saltzman Mr. Neil Sellin Mrs. Selig Silverman Mr. Edgar O. Smith Mr. Ralph V. Sollitt Mr. Milton Sonday Mr. Richard Stein Mme. Alice Stern Mr. Hugh Stix Thomas Strahan Co.
Dr. Harold P. Stern: 1 English textile; 1 English fireplace screen or "surround" Mr. T. Taniquchi: 95 Japanese paintings Mr. John Thacher: 1 lacquer table; Japanese; Momoyama; mother-of-pearl
Smithsonian Institution Mr. Sergio Storel Mr. Jose Tasende Ms. Susan Vanderwoude Miss Berta Walker Mr. and Mrs. David T. Workman Virginia Zabriskie Gallery Miss Virginia Zabriskie
Mrs. Dorothy Brooks Fenton Aline Fruhauf Mrs. Robert Goodale John Gossage Dr. Christopher A. Graf and
Janet Graf, his wife Edward M. Groth HMK Fine Arts Mr. and Mrs. Mervin Honig Mr. John R. Hopkins Hymen Horn Milton Horn Robert Flynn Johnson Mrs. Carlyle Jones Jacob Kainen
Rebecca Nause, his wife Mrs. Jefferson Patterson Reverend DeWolf Perry Katherine Poole Monroe E. Price Henry Ward Ranger (Bequest through
Associate Program Society of Washington Printmakers Bernard Solomon Harold Tager, Jr. George W. Thompkins Carl Von der Lancken Washington Print Club Alexander Vernon Wasson Mr. and Mrs. Donald Webster Emil Weddige Mrs. Evan M. Wilson Dan Wisel Zabriskie Gallery Virginia M. Zabriskie
Underwriters Ashland Oil, Inc. Bailey Coke Transport, Inc. Bath Iron Works Corp. Bethlehem Steel Corporation Mr. George H. Blohm The Boswell Oil Company Mr. Frederick S. Boyce Brent Towing Co., Inc. Calhoon Meba Engineering School Campbell Barge Line, Inc. Canal Barge Co., Inc. Cargo Carriers, Inc. Mr. Howard F. Casey Circle Line/Statue of Liberty Ferry,
Industries Dixie Carriers, Inc. Joseph C. Domino E. H. Edwards Company Exxon Company, U.S.A. Federal Barge Lines, Inc. G & C Towing, Inc. General Electric Company General Stevedores, Inc. Gladders Barge Line, Inc. Professor George W. Hilton Humboldt Boat Service Co. Industrial Tank, Inc. Ingram Barge Company International Paint Company Interstate Oil Transport Company Mr. Dennis Lindsay S. C. Loveland Co., Inc. Maxon Marine Industries, Inc. Mobil Oil Corporation National Maritime Union of America Neare, Gibbs, & Co., Inc. Oakland Traffic Club, Port of
Marine Division Shell Oil Company Ms. Magda B. Tenser C. J. Thibodeaux and Co. The Tobacco Institute, Inc. Todd Shipyards Corporation Transportation Institute U. S. Steel Foundation, Inc. Union Mechling Upper Mississippi Towing
Corporation) Mrs. Thomas K. Cline Mrs. William H. Crocker Ann M. Cummings Mrs. Anderson C. Dearing, Jr. Elizabeth U. Delaney Lenora S. Dunlap Eleanor M. Earle Mrs. Elinore Engelberg Donald C. Farley, Jr. Gertrude Helen Fay Helen M. Feeney Ellamae Fehrer Zelma Felten John T. Fesperman David E. Finley David B. Fitzgerald Sally Flanagan Mr. and Mrs. David Forell Norma Foulger Ms. Marquerite E. Fowle Cynthia Fraser Robert J. Gardner Mrs. Benjamin J. Garfunkel Paul E. Geier Mrs. James L. Goodwin Alfred M. Granum Paula S. Greenman Dolores Grieco Jean Hakes G. E. Hall
Mr. and Mrs. William E. Harvey Mrs. Helen R. Hollis Mrs. W. Douglas Hopkins Dr. Bruce Howe Eleanore G. Jenks Capt. E. E. Johnson Emily W. Jones
Mr. and Mrs. John B. Jones, Jr. Carolyn E. Junkin Mrs. Amanda Bryan Kane Mrs. Andrew S. Keck Marian Kirkland Mr. David Lloyd Kreeger Mr. and Mrs. James F. Lawrence Mary Nelson Lee Mr. and Mrs. Guy Martin Dr. John Russell Mason
Abrahamson, Ms. Ada and Abrahamson, Ms. Grace: brass scarificator, glass cup for bloodletting (318916).
Adrosko, Miss Rita J.: Japanese print and woven silk picture (321742); 4 Jacquard silk pictures, coverlet, shawl, Japanese silk fabric, 7 pieces of silk fabric, European folk textile (321786).
Anderson, Mrs. Anna White: woman's nightgown, 1850-74, in memory of Mary B. White and Bennett S. White (314646).
Ashbridge, Col. and Mrs. Whitney: official naval letters and documents, 17 U.S. naval uniform items, 33 examples of fabric, lace, needlework and patterns (316364).
Barbaro, Mrs. Sophronia Waesche: pair of silk stockings, knitted cap, pair of lady's mitts, knitted scarf (321749).
Baum, Mrs. Nathaly C. and Chase, Howard: 569 weathervane molds; 11 weathervanes, reproductions made ca. 1954; 4 metal silhouettes; miscel- laneous fragments of molds; archival materials pertaining to weathervanes (313781).
Bender, Leonard F., M.D.: Renulife violet ray machine (306394). Bender, C. O. (see Broadwater, Marion Viola, Estate of). Beran, Delmar L. and Beran, Mrs. Helen Willophine: William Jennings Bryan
April 22, 1953 (316348). Bignell, Miss Nancy M. : 11 textile fragments (321779). Bimbra, Mr. and Mrs. Surindar Singh: 42 lithographic illustrations from
Puck and Judge magazines (316500). Blair, Mrs. William McCormick, Jr.: embroidered panel, brocaded panel
The Woman's Christian Temperance Union (319989). Boardman, Richard A.: man's dressing gown, ca. 1890 (313234). Bolduc, Fr. Hector L. : group of Umayyad and Abbasid silver coins (320727). Borkowski, Mrs. Mary K. : bicentennial quilt (315365). Boyink, Brent A. and Boyink, Elizabeth A.: bicentennial quilt, pillow pattern
Breen, Mrs. Virginia Wise: pair of woman's wedding shoes, 1930 (316340). Breininger, Mr. and Mrs. Lester P., Jr.: 3 pieces of glazed earthenware
Byrd, CDR Richard E. (see Breyer, Mrs. Katherine B.). Cady, Dr. Walter G., 17 crystals (314600). Calkins, Mrs. Helen E.: hair dryer (307085). Campbell, Ellen J.: man's four-piece suit (316432). Cannizzaro, Joseph S. (see Hall, Anna E., Estate of). Cannon, Mrs. Irene: child's festival vest (319007). Canole, Joseph F., Jr.: reproduction belt plate, "NY" (321652). Caress, Virginia Bayard: man's vest, woman's bodice, 1839 (316400). Carmichael, Pearl Kidston (Mrs. Leonard): English tall clock (316402); 2
Clain-Stefanelli, Mrs. Elvira: 2 large art medals used as New Year presenta- tion pieces by the Director of the Paris Mint (320718); 9 commemorative
Cullum, Ms. Carole A.: American battleship flag used in anti-war demonstra- tions (314685), 8 Vietnam protest posters (319867).
Cunningham, Miss Cynthia: "Famous" Buttonhole Worker attachment for sewing machine, ca. 1940 (319018).
Doodeman, Mrs. George: 2 pairs of child's stockings, 1933 (316339). Dougherty, Mrs. Gladys: etching, 2 lithographs (316527); E. Ingraham & Co.
Alexander for Mayor of the District of Columbia (320803). Dysland, Robert C. (see Corson, Dorothy M., Estate of). Eames, James H. : 27 drafting instruments (317888). Ebersole, David S.: Australian Ike jacket, 1940's (316436). Echols, Elsie Orr (Mrs. Stanley B.) : woman's dress, 1935; pair of shoes,
Estate of Sam Eskin (317885). Eskin, Stanley (see Eskin, Otho Evans). Espenschied, Peter: electric dishwasher, ca. 1910 (320002). Evans, Paul: 9 pieces of American art pottery (316415). Evins, Mrs. Elizabeth S. and Evins, Thomas A.: lady's handwoven kerchief
Fawcett, Mrs. Donna: brick made in Alexandria, Virginia (318973). Feldstein, Albert Louis: 30 buttons, newspapers, stickers, brochures (321648). Ferry, Chamberlain: pair of mechanical telephones (319945). Fischer, John A., M.D.: man's suit, stockings and shoes, 1966-68 (314642). Fischer, Miss Katrina Sigsbee: oil painting of Colin Glencannon by Anton
Otto Fischer (321676). Flanagan, Ms. Lucile: political tote bag (320868). Floyd, Thomas L. : 6 silver medals from the Indian Tribal Series, Phoenix,
Frye, Miss Melinda Y.: star-shaped torchlight, 19th century (319005). Fuller, Mr. and Mrs. Daniel B.: 7 fabrics (320856).
Gaylord, Miss Helen K. : cut glass vase, ca 1910 (316424). Gaynor, Mrs. Margaret C. : pen used by President Ford to sign Bill S. 907
Glennon, Ms. Ann E.: 13 objects associated with the Equal Rights Amend- ment (320804). Glover, E. Lee: multi-flora paperweight vase (319977). Goldsmith, Mrs. Gertrude Maud: tricolor kinescope, image orthicon, shadow
Habeck, Edgar, M.D.: collection of 83 obstetrical instruments (316358). Hadley, Mrs. Hazel Mason: 34 woman's and man's clothing and accessory
Philadelphia (319039). Hale, Mrs. Crescent Porter (see Hale, Mabel E.). Hale, Mabel E. (Mrs. Crescent Porter) : Chinese export service (partial)
George Washington shoe buckle (320822). Hanley, Mrs. Hope Anthony: 73 tools for textile processing, hat stretcher
Helm, Mr. and Mrs. John: gas cooking stove, hot water heater (315333). Henry, Stephen M. : CSA reproduction oval belt plate, die stamp (320871). Herd, Ms. Janice M. : pillowcase with silver photograph, 1865 (311458). Hermann, Stanford L.: electrotherapeutic treatment kit, 6 electrodes (316421). Hernandez-M, William J.: 19 newspapers in Spanish, English, and Spanish- English (319022). Hiltunen, Mrs. Eila: bronze plaquette portraying Mrs. Henry Ford II (320782). Hinners, Capt. & Mrs. Robert A.: early 20th century American cut glass
Hoke, Donald: watch, Camden & Amboy railroad, ca. 1855 (321777). Hoke, Robert F.: Peerless light bulb (316498). Holden, Mrs. Georgia Hough: 5 wrist watches (320838). Holstein, Charles B. : proposed one-cent piece, 1974 (319094). Holt, Mrs. Fred W. (see Beary, Mrs. Donald B.). Holtzman, Jon: 536 ancient coins from Alexandria (320709). Hopfer, Mrs. Westley M. : 25 U.S. and foreign police and fire department
Hut, Robert A.: 39 pieces turn-of-the-century art pottery (319030). Hutchins, Mr. & Mrs. Carlton E. : Frederick-town Herald newspaper (319862). Irwin, Mrs. James W. : naval midshipman's dress blue uniform, ca. 1950-52
Kaplan, Ms. Shirlie: The Woman's Bible and study guide (318998); 3 sweat- shirts, campaign button related to ERA and Shirley Chisholm (320010).
Keffalas, Mr. and Mrs. Pete J., and sons: calling card; beaded purse, ca. 1860; pair of gloves, ca. 1850; handkerchief ring (316482).
Conference, Mexico City, July 1975 (321680). Luckenbach, Mrs. Aurdey J.; Luckenbach, Edgar F., Ill and Luckenbach,
Jason A. : model of iron ship Tillie Starbuck, in memory of Edgar F. Lucken- bach, Jr. (321713). Luckenbach, Edgar F., Ill (see Luckenbach, Mrs. Audrey J.). Luckenbach, Jason A. (see Luckenbach, Mrs. Audrey J.). Lyons, Dorothy M. and Lyons, Mary A.: mouse trap (318955). Lyons, Mary A. (see Lyons, Dorothy M.). Machen, Mrs. Helen L. : hair ornament, woman's comb, 1920-30; woman's fur
Mayfield, Miss Marion E.: 2 midshipman's jackets with buttons (317923). Mayo, Ms. Edith P.: 4 issues of Akwesasne Notes, poster (319000); 2 military
Merrill, Dana C. : 36-star U. S. national flag with three stars added (316523). Metzenberg, Helene F. : free blown glass tumbler, ca. 1775-85 (316491). Miles, Mrs. Alice M. : ceramic ashtray, 2 ceramic figurines, 19 trade cards
Capitol (318981); glass Klein bottle (318982). Olson, Ruth E. (Mrs. Edwin T.) : woven cotton bedcover (321741). Orso, Leo: 2 cassette tape recordings (316370). Owings, Grace S.: 3 girl's dresses, 1882-88 (316401).
Palmer, Miss Alma E.: refrigerator car model, medal, certificate (321708). Panchard, Marthe: knitted shawl (317932). Parisi, Joseph: brass bugle, ca. 1860-1880 (318010).
Parker, William A.: English pocket watch, bullet, letter, plan (317987). Parks, Mrs. Lillian R.: 2 dresses, jacket (321658). Pastuck, Boris "Buddy": sheet music and 45 rpm recording, tribute to John
F. Kennedy (317945). Patterson, Mrs. Jefferson: set of 20th century cotton signal flags (316434). Pepple, Mr. and Mrs. Lamar: Amberina pitcher (319889).
Nations headquarters, October 24, 1949 (319868). Pritchard, Mr. and Mrs. John R. : sherds excavated at the Morgan Jones kiln
M.D., by Queen Victoria, ca. 1867 (314683). Rauch, Dorothy Stater: 14 bookbinding tools (318027). Read, Mrs. Aldona S.: man's waistcoat, ca. 1770-1790 (316407); collar, 2
Scott, Andrew R. : 4 ship construction notebooks, 1907-1913 (321677). Sears, Gerald: pair of earrings (321614). Seiden, Ms. Marsha: saluting cannon (316510). Seidman, Sy: parade axe, umbrella (317873); 49-star flag, 5 campaign objects
Showers, Mrs. Dorothy A. and Showers, Giles M. : circular mill saw (320023). Showers, Giles M. (see Showers, Mrs. Dorothy A.). Shure, Jane E.: pair of skis (313221).
Smith, Eleanor H. (Mrs. Lawrence M. C.).: emu egg, ca. 1876 (317983). Smith, Helen Belding (Mrs. Henry P., Ill): woman's purse, 1900 (314651). Smith, Miss Margaret R. : teaspoon (318983). Smith, Mr. and Mrs. Peter H. (see Smith, Peter H., Jr.) Smith, Peter H., Jr. (through Mr. and Mrs. Peter H. Smith) : spring lancet
Sneed, Janet R. (through Jimmy Sneed) : 13 tools and small indicators (314531). Sneed, Jimmy (see Sneed, Janet R.). Spelbring, Anna (Mrs. Ernest O'Dell) (through Miss Mary A. Spelbring) :
Spengler, William F.: 22 coins of Medieval and Islamic India (320726). Srebnik, Charles: pattern silver dime, 1869 (320714). Stabler, Anne B. (see Breyer, Mrs. Katherine B.). Stabler, David (see Breyer, Mrs. Katherine B.). Stankard, Martin F. : 3 glass paperweights (320828). Steadry, Frederick A.: 15 photographs (316419). Stevens, Ames: 7 revolvers, 1860 (317939). Stevenson, Hon. Adlai, III (through Lawrence Towner) : campaign hat, 1892
Sucher, Florence (Mrs. Richard C.) : military leggins, hat, pennant (317934). Sullivan, Mrs. Charleen Schuller: set-up for knitting machine (321715). Sullivan, Mr. and Mrs. Gail and Sullivan, Richard: Berlin work picture,
January 1, 1870 (316362). Sullivan, Richard (see Sullivan, Mr. and Mrs. Gail). Sunde, Dr. M. L. : humidity measuring device for incubators (320027). Sutherland, Mrs. William: 2 bow figures, ca. 1755 (319027). Swanson, Mrs. Renee and Swanson, Robert W. : political poster (319048). Swanson, Robert W. (see Swanson, Mrs. Renee). Swartz, John J.: cap, 2 naval uniforms, 1949-1953 (316476). Syz, Dr. Hans: English porcelain cup, saucer, ca. 1800 (318931); 13 pieces of
Tillstrom, Marilee: 2 woman's dresses, bracelet, panty hose (316466). Tinsley, R. Max: strip of 4 campaign stamps (315475). Tomchin, Julian: sweater, pair of man's shoes, 2 shirts (311810). Torn, Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence J.: telephone booth, ca. 1880 (319067). Towner, Lawrence (see Stevenson, Hon. Adlai, III). Toye, Richard E.: hat (321663). Turner, Lillian and Turner, Milton: 9 contemporary sulphide paperweights
Uebel, Kay Kerr: woman's dress, panty stockings, pair of shoes (312934). Uihlein, Mrs. Viola: baby's truss (318979). Underwood, Arthur F.: 3 surface roughness calibrators and measuring
Vosloh, Lynn W. : Equal Rights Amendment pennant (321681). Walker, Mrs. Sears: picture of "suffrage hen" (315312). Wallace, David H.: 5 World War II military documents (318025). Watkins, Judith Wood (see Watkins, Mr. and Mrs. Kennedy C).
Weinberg, Hanns: Sevres Ecuelle cup, saucer, slop basin, vase (319069). Weinberg, Irvin: dry cell Faradic battery (317862). Welch, Mrs. Frankie: 33 scarves (318978). Welsh, Peter: engraving (317840).
Werner, George E.: U.S. Army artillery medallion (320767). Weske, John S. : calculator, 3 instruction manuals, invoice, folder of instruc- tions (318943). White, John H., Jr.: electric railway headlight (321709). Whitney, Mrs. Alan: man's dressing gown, in memory of William M. Koszut
After Six, Inc. (through Bernard Toll): man's shirt, tie, 3 tuxedos (310305). Agriculture, U.S. Department of: Agricultural Research Service: 3 micro- scopes with cases and accessories (315328). Alabama, The University of: Department of Physics (through Dr. Robert N.
Mines (through Dr. Ralph J. Schwarz): arithmometer (318961). Conduit and Foundation Corporation (through Leopold Neiman) : 7 joints
Washington Fashion Group, The (through Ms. Ruey Messenger) : 142 cloth- ing and accessory items (310259).
White Sewing Machine Company (through Mrs. Bertha Gold) : White sewing machine, Elna sewing machine (321629).
Mellen, Mrs. Charles R. : 2 Victorian Gardens tables (c. 1830). National Gallery of Art: Cuttings of Alternanthera cv. State of New Hampshire: 3 Betula papyrifera and 3 Syringa vulgaris. Read, Dr. Robert: 2 Musa coccinea, 3 Musa velutina, 2 Eriobotrya japonica,
Osmanthus heterophyllus 'Variegatus.' Sachet, Dr. Marie: Hippeastrum sp. Saul, Miss Edith Ray: 2 antique nursery catalogues.
Bonin Islands. Bedini, Silvio A.: Thinkers and Tinkers. Boorstin, Daniel: America in Two Centuries. 140 volumes. Borch, Otto, Ambassador of Denmark: Schmidt-Phiseldek. Bradley, James: Collected Contributions of F. L. Whipple. 2 volumes. Buechner, Mrs. Helmut: Journal collection. Bull, George: Several guidebooks.
Center of Military History (U. S. Army) : Several volumes of Vietnam studies. Chase, Mrs. Franklin: Fourteen volumes on architecture. Conger, Dr. Paul: Natural History of Birds. Creech, John L. : Commemoration of U. S. Bi-Centennial Anniversary in 1976:
Bonsai in Japan. Dee, Elaine: Twenty volumes on art. Duncanson, Miss Isabelle Foster: History of the Adventures and Sufferings of
Howell, Edgar: Echo of a Distant Drum: Winslow Homer and the Civil War. Howson, Mrs. Hubert: An Alphabet of Celebrities. Kaufmann, Robert: Twenty-five decorative art books. Kenk, Dr. Roman: Fauna der in Krain Bekannten Saeugerthiere, Voegel,
Reptilien und Fische. Knez, Dr. Eugene: Arts of Ancient Korea. Krombein, Dr. Karl: Two serials and Faune de Madagascar. Lantz, Walter D.: Kircher's D' Order Aardse Weereld. Lissim, Simon: Eight ceramic journals. Mason, Dr. Brian: Ten volumes on mineral sciences. Mason, David: Five hundred titles on weaving.
Mello, Dr. James: Persepolis and Ancient Iran and Cenozoic Reef Biofacies. Metcalf, Pauline: Seven art journals and books. Nickerson, Dorothy: Nineteen cartons of materials on color. Nicolson, Dr. Dan: Thirteen volumes of the Bulletin of the Botanical Survey
Schmeltzer, Mrs. C. B. : Three cartons of books and magazines. Seaborn, Richard G. (Canadian Embassy) : Between Friends/Entre Amis. Sharer, Cyrus: Four knitting books. Smith, Sheila: Two books of prints. Spangler, Dr. Paul: Some Ectoparasites of the Birds of Asia and Migration
Taylor, Dr. William: Thirteen volumes of American Scientist, 1957-1970. U.S. Army Military History Research Collection: Four volumes on military
Mr. and Mrs. William Benedict Mr. and Mrs. William Draper Blair Employees of Braniff Airways, Inc. Michel de Bry Ailsa Mellon Bruce Fund Syma Busiel Fund Elizabeth O. Carville Mr. and Mrs. Ralph F. Colin Collectors Committee Werner Drewes
Lucien Goldschmidt, Inc. Dr. and Mrs. George Benjamin Green The sisters of Tomas Harris Ruth K. Henschel in memory of her
Stuckey, Jr. Friends of Esther Stuttman Hon. and Mrs. Robert H. Thayer Mr. and Mrs. Burton Tremaine Mr. and Mrs. David Tunick Versailles Foundation Mr. and Mrs. Arthur E. Vershbow Mr. and Mrs. George W. Ware Dr. and Mrs. Robert J. Wetmore Woodward Foundation, Washington,
Mrs. David C. Acheson Mrs. Thomas I. Ahart Mrs. Richard G. Alexander Mrs. Denton Blair Mrs. Huntington T. Block Mrs. Philip S. Bowie Mrs. Adelyn Breeskin Mrs. James M. Byrne Mrs. Charles H. Clark Mrs. W. Montague Cobb Mrs. C. Burke Elbrick Mrs. John Worden Gill Mrs. Robert Reed Gray Mrs. Karl G. Harr, Jr. Mrs. Walter Hodges Mrs. Woods Hollingsworth Mrs. Marshall Hornblower
Mrs. Walter D. Innis Mrs. James Lehrer Mrs. Edward H. Levi Mrs. J. Noel Macy Mrs. John Minor Maury Mrs. George C. McGhee Mrs. John Ulric Net Mrs. Robert B. Nelson Mrs. Dudley Owen Mrs. Jefferson Patterson Mrs. James R. Patton, Jr. Mrs. Charles H. Percy Mrs. Paul N. Perrot Mrs. Horace White Peters Mrs. Malcolm Price Mrs. Edward Rich, Jr. Mrs. S. Dillon Ripley
Mrs. Nelson Rockefeller Mrs. Reynaldo F. Rodriquez Mrs. John T. Sapienza Mrs. Brackley Shaw Mrs. John Farr Simmons Mrs. Henry P. Smith III Mrs. Potter Stewart Mrs. James W. Symington
Mrs. T. Graydon Upton Mrs. Robert D. Van Roijen Mrs. John Carl Warnecke Mrs. Paul C. Warnke Mrs. T. Ames Wheeler Mrs. Robert S. Wilkinson III Mrs. Evan M. Wilson Mrs. Bissell Wood
June Abel James Allen Patricia Allen Thelma Baker Karen Bisat Dr. Susan Bogner Millie Bonhit Diane Brassard Dale Brogan Susan Brown Lynn Clark Elinor Dunnigan Mary Ann Elwood Joanne Grumm Lisa Gwirtzman Norma Hazen Diane Hickey
Ms. Mary-Agnes Anderson Mrs. Marion Artwohl Mrs. Pat Boedecker Mrs. Lillian Brickman Mrs. Kathy Campoli Ms. Belle Church Mrs. Helen Clendenin Mrs. Gerry Compher Mrs. Bertha Epstein Mrs. Marjorie Findly Mrs. Joyce Fried Mrs. Eleanor Fullerton Mrs. Ruth Furey Mr. Nathan Gilbert Mrs. Katie Gilligan Mrs. Pat Hilburn Mrs. Ruth Hill Mrs. Connie Imming Mrs. Joyce Ingle Mrs. Katy Jewett Mrs. Miriam Kuskin Mrs. Dixie Lee
Ms. Linda Leslie Mrs. Clarice Levy Mr. Justin Lewis Mrs. Joan Liebman Mrs. Jan Lissey Mrs. Sylvia Littman Mrs. Marjorie Matthews Mrs. Mercedes McCarthy Mr. Thomas Mills Mrs. Elizabeth Monroe Mrs. Martha Morales Mrs. Linda Nichols Mrs. Bernice Rashish Mrs. Sue Reed Mrs. Dianne Rosenbaum Mrs. Sydell Sandy Mrs. Edythe Shepsle Mrs. Margaret Slabinski Mrs. Virginia Tannar Mrs. Sandra Tussing Mrs. Vivian Ware Mrs. Frances Wilson
The Smithsonian administration should not rest in its efforts to make prudent use of the dollars which may be appropriated to us by the Congress. It seems wise, therefore, to restudy the whole original design and to set exhibit and research needs against costs in such a way as to attempt to hold the line financially in any request to the Congress for a firm budget. Last autumn we asked the Bureau of the Budget for study funds, but this was unfortunately cut out of the President's budget for the 1970 session of the second session of the 91st Congress. We hope to go back to the Bureau of the Budget again this year and request funds for appropriate studies of the project. There will be only one National Air and Space Museum and we had better make sure that it is going to be the best one that can be feasibly obtained as well as a prudent and efficient use of government funds. Fortunately, the cooperation of nasa, the continued coopera- tion of the Air and Space Museum, and the perseverance of our budgetarily limited staff have combined to make sure that those objects as well as the documents incorporated in the eventual building will be of the highest quality and caliber. It is now up to us to produce the finest building that can be constructed. Happily, Mr. Gyo Obata of the firm of Hellmuth, Obata and Kassabaum has consented to restudy and redesign the building for what we hope will be an appro- priate cost, and this concept the Regents have approved.
We are now making strenuous efforts to cope with this threat to the future of the Institution. As in the case of federal funds, we are also currently examining all of our private activities to eliminate the unnecessary or less important. At the same time we are striving vigorously to increase income from our various private activities such as our Museum Shops and our Associates organizations. In addition, we have launched a national campaign to build up our private endow- ment funds to assure a substantially greater private income in the future. To this end, an Office of Development was formed in Septem- ber 1969 with Mr. Lynford E. Kautz as Director. Under his guidance a new national associates program has been launched with Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr., a Regent, serving as Chairman. The key to the success of the operation, is of course, our new Smithsonian maga- zine, launched in April 1970 and already showing great promise. It is anticipated that this program will have far-reaching benefits to the Institution. Besides serving as a giant step forward in carrying out our mandate to increase and diffuse knowledge among men, it can at the same time serve as the foundation for building a national counseling organization which will serve to attract the financial support which we so sorely need.
When I returned to the Smithsonian as Secretary in 1964, the Insti- tution was completing a major cycle of facilities development under- taken to increase its capacity as a research institution. The National Collection of Fine Arts and National Portrait Gallery were readying new quarters with ample study space, in addition to new exhibition and storage spaces. A renovation of the historic Smithsonian Institu- tion Building was in prospect. Fourteen halls of modern research and collection storage space were being completed for the National Mu- seum of Natural History. The splendid new National Museum of History and Technology had just opened, with two floors of scholarly studies and collection storage areas. A research building was being considered as a step in the ten-year construction program of the National Zoological Park. The staff of our tropical research laboratory was preparing to move from restricted quarters on Barro Colorado Island onto the mainland and to establish strategically situated marine biology facilities as their sphere of inquiry widened to include the diverse habitats of Panama and the tropics as a whole. But the administrative and fiscal requirements for the expanded research efforts allowed by physical expansion had barely begun and there was little understanding within the wid^r community of the character and extent of the Smithsonian's interests in research. I felt then that our first efforts should be to deepen the Institution's emphasis on research, in order to attain the advantages of the building program so successfully carried forward by my predecessor, Dr. Carmichael. So our professional research staff on fulltime appointments has grown, from 243 in 1965 to 310 today. Of course without strong support from technical assistants and support divisions such an expansion of the research effort could not be effective since all of these necessary functions would otherwise have to be borne on the shoulders of the research staff, and here faltering government budget support has held back our appropriate growth.
I have been deeply concerned about the scale of services available from the Smithsonian Institution Libraries, an indispensable auxiliary of all of our research. A distinguished librarian, Dr. Russell Shank, was recruited in September 1967 from the forefront of the library profession, given senior standing and a pledge of continued support until our libraries could be judged adequate to the needs of the research enterprise. That day still seems far off, for the constriction in federal funding and freezes on employment, worsened by steadily rising costs for subscriptions and monographs, continues to limit severe-
We have sought to increase research support in the form of techni- cians in our research laboratories and support for field investigations. The oceanography support group, ably led by Dr. I. Eugene Wallen, has been notably successful in expanding opportunities for staff mem- bers to go to sea, helping to overcome a very serious lack of ship time which severely hampered our unique effort in marine biology. An automatic data-processing support group has been built up in both Washington and Cambridge to meet needs for computation and information storage.
The first of a newly scheduled fall meeting of the Board of Regents was held on 5 November 1969 at the National Zoological Park. Such additional meetings are planned in order to give the Regents an opportunity to consider a series of presentations on the various programs of the Institution. Emphasis at this meeting was on the National Zoological Park. Talks were given by Dr. Theodore Reed on the status of Zoo construction and by Dr. John Eisenberg concerning the Ceylon-Smithsonian elephant research program.
The winter meeting of the Board of Regents was held at Hillwood, the estate of Mrs. Marjorie Merri weather Post, on 28 January 1970. Chief Justice Warren E. Burger had been elected earlier by mail ballot as Chancellor of the Smithsonian Institution. It was recognized that Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr., had been designated a Regent by Public Law 91-30, dated 17 June 1969.
The spring meeting of the Board of Regents was held in the Freer Gallery of Art on 20 May 1970. The Chancellor welcomed Vice Presi- dent Spiro T. Agnew to the meeting of the Board and also welcomed the new Regent, Mr. James E. Webb, whose appointment was approved by Public Law 91-255 on 18 May 1970.
At the conclusion of the meeting the Chancellor, on behalf of the Board of Regents and the Secretary, presented a scroll to Mrs. Agnes E. Meyer for her more than fifty years of devotion and service to the Freer Gallery of Art.
Mr. Johnston retired 31 August 1969 after serving five years as Director. His skill at planning and organization was applied success- fully to planning the new building to house the National Air and Space Museum on the Mall in Washington. Several important legisla- tive steps toward the construction of the new building were accom- plished during his five years of service, culminating in Congressional action authorizing the construction. Mr. Johnston organized and di- rected well-conceived programs for preservation of the collection and their management for research and study. The program for the selec- tion, acquisition, and circulation of significant space craft and materi- el, which will have far-reaching consequences for the Museum, was instituted under Mr. Johnston's direction. Pie was a dedicated advocate of a high priority for the rapid development of the new building and the programs of the Museum.
Mr. Garber retired 28 February 1969, after forty-nine years of ser- vice at the Smithsonian Institution dedicated to the aircraft collection and the National Air and Space Museum. He is widely known and respected for his lectures and his deep knowledge of the history of
Mr. Paul Edward Garber's retirement further reduced the profes- sional staff. The activities of the remaining two professionals are
Stri scientists also extended their educational contributions else- where. During the year they conducted seminars at the University of Panama, University of California, University of Chicago, Cornell University, Harvard University, Rockefeller University, Washington University, and elsewhere. Courses were conducted at the University of Mexico by Dr. Dressier, at the University of Pennsylvania by Drs. Rand and Robinson, and at Princeton University by Dr. Leigh.
There have been several recent additions to the staff. Dr. Roy Hard- ing, geneticist, will assume the direction of work on chromosome aberrations induced by ultraviolet radiation and will also undertake work on the genetics of photoperiodism. Dr. Andrew Snope will assist with this work. Dr. Maurice Margulies has spent the past year on sabbatical leave at Harvard University.
Madame Suharto, wife of the President of Indonesia, presents Dr. Reed with a photograph of the Komodo dragon, gift of her government. Mrs. Soedjatmoko, wife of the Indonesian Ambassador, looks on.
The government of Indonesia presented the National Zoo with a Komodo dragon as a mate for the lone female that the Zoo has had since 1967. When President Suharto and his wife paid a state visit to Washington, Mrs. Suharto came to the Zoo, bringing with her a photograph of the huge male, which arrived a few days later on 27 May.
Although hiring of personnel has been restricted, the Zoo was for- tunate in getting an architect on the staff, Mr. Norman Melun, who reported for work on 4 May. This enables the Zoo to set up a planning division, which will oversee the development and modernization of the Park.
The current bibliography of anthropological publications has con- tinued to develop under the direction of Dr. Robert M. Laughlin. In the past year a total of 6800 titles has been classified and readied for publication. To date 2439 have been published and the remainder will continue to appear bimonthly.
A special committee on the proposed National Museum of Man, chaired by Dr. Irven DeVore, met in February 1970 to develop plans for relating the Center to the proposed Museum. The report of this meeting, presented to Secretary Ripley at the Center's meeting in May, precipitated the subsequent resolution on the part of the membership to move the Center in its new direction.
The announcement made in January 1969 of the appointment of Dr. Daniel J. Boorstin as the Director of the National Museum of History and Technology signalized the search for a fresh approach to history in the museum world. Coming from the Department of His- tory of the University of Chicago, Dr. Boorstin assumed his new responsibilities in October.
School group watching Mrs. Lois Vann spinning wool on an 18th-century woolwheel from Virginia, in the National Museum of History and Technology.
Russell Lynes, President Howard W. Lipman, Vice President Harold O. Love, Vice President Mrs. Otto L. Spaeth, Vice President Stanford C. Stoddard, Secretary-Treasurer Harry Baldwin Irving F. Burton Edmond duPont Joseph H. Hirshhorn James Humphry III Miss Milka Iconomoff Eric Larrabee Robert L. McNeil, Jr.
Mr. Freer understood that the most effective way to study a civili- zation, to learn what motivated the thinking of men in other times and other parts of the world, was to study the finest things they made. The investigation of the reasons why men made these beautiful things, and the research into the nature of the materials of which they were made, and the methods used to fashion those materials cannot but yield basic information about the men themselves and the civilizations they created. Thus the twofold program envisaged by Mr. Freer in- volves the continuing search for works of oriental art of the highest quality that may be added to the Freer Gallery collections and the con- tinuing study of these works of art as keys to understanding the civili- zations that produced them. This research in all its manifold aspects is the basic task of the professional staff of the Freer Gallery; and all the supporting services of the Gallery (library, photographic laboratory, oriental picture-mounting studio, technical laboratory, etc.) operate to expedite and facilitate this research. Members of the curatorial staff travel frequently and widely in order to be familiar with the latest additions to other collections, to examine archeological sites and find- ings, and to meet and discuss problems of mutual interest with col- leagues who are engaged in related research. At the same time, we re- ceive and give every cooperation to all scholars, including many from Europe and Asia, who come to the Freer Gallery to make use of our unparalleled resources both in the collections themselves and in the study facilities. We also give guidance and encouragement to gradu- ate students in the field who come to the Gallery either for short visits or for protracted periods under established fellowship programs. Work of this kind does not lend itself to sensational discoveries. It proceeds slowly, and when something important is accomplished, it is published. Our public is to be found among the users of 500-odd li- braries and universities all over the world that receive Freer publica- tions free of charge. The books are also widely sold. Our most recent work, published this year, was the second volume of The Freer Chinese Bronzes, which deals with the technical aspects of the subject. This was a pioneering effort in that it is the first book ever devoted to the study of the materials and methods which produced the magnifi- cent vessels that are the glory of the Bronze Age in China and one of the finest artistic achievements in the history of mankind.
The exhibition was "Augustus Saint-Gaudens: The Portrait Re- liefs." A full-scale catalog, designed by Leonard Baskin, reproducing all reliefs from photographs made especially for this purpose by David Batchelder and produced by the Meriden Gravure Company, was made possible by a generous gift from Mr. and Mrs. John E. Marqusee of New York. The catalog was subsequently issued in book form by Gross- man Publishers. The exhibition was organized and the catalog written by John Dryfhout, curator of the Saint Gaudens National Historic Site in Cornish, New Hampshire.
Among the many important acquisitions of the year, several deserve special mention. A magnificent life portrait of John Randolph of Roanoke by John Wesley Jarvis was given by Mrs. G. B. Lambert, a descendant of the artist; and a fine oil of General Horatio Gates by James Peale (after Charles Willson Peale) was acquired by the Gal- lery partly with its own funds and partly through a generous gift from Mr. Lawrence Fleischman. Through the kind offices of a member of the npg Commision, Wilmarth Sheldon Lewis, Gardner Cox pre- sented the Gallery with his moving study of Robert F. Kennedy, as well as two original sketches for the work, which were done from life in February 1968. Other notable acquisitions included a portrait of Daniel of Saint Thomas Jenifer by John Hesselius, acquired from a descendant of the subject; a handsome version in marble of Giuseppi Cerrachi's portrait bust of George Washington in Roman garb; a Sharpies pastel of Alexander Hamilton; an oil of Bret Harte by John Pettie, the best-known likeness of the author; a portrait of Mathew Brady by Thomas LeClear, one of only two known oils of the master American photographer; and Adolfo Muller-Ury's pastel of Lillian Russell, which was included in the Gallery's opening exhibition.
Mrs. Lisa Suter Taylor, former program director of the Smithsonian Associates, was appointed Director in October, replacing Dr. Richard Wunder, who is on sabbatical leave. Mr. Leo Arffman was engaged to administer the capital development program.
In October, Mr. Taylor and Mr. Welsh attended a meeting of the icom International Committee for Museums of Science^ and Tech- nology which was held in India, principally at Bangalore. The purpose of the meeting was to plan a laboratory with a capability to produce basic science exhibits designed to meet the specific needs of individual, developing countries. It is anticipated that a laboratory will be founded in India at Bangalore and that it will become a depository of experience, a center of training, and a useful example of international cooperation among museums. This meeting was the culmination of several years' effort and planning by the Director General of Museums based on the belief that science-teaching exhibits, carefully prepared and tested, can help bridge the science lag between developed and de- veloping countries.
Significant progress was made this year in coordinating and plan- ning the Smithsonian's role in the celebration of the Bicentennial of the American Revolution. This was accomplished by Mr. John J. Slocum, special assistant for Bicentennial planning, whose completed study, with estimates of the various Smithsonian elements expected to participate in the Bicentennial, has been forwarded to the Secretary of the Institution. Mr. Slocum continued to serve as a liaison officer be- tween the Smithsonian, the American Revolution Bicentennial Com- mission, other government agencies, and private organizations.
Smithsonian groups holding conferences at Belmont have included the Smithsonian Council, Interdisciplinary Communications Program, Office of Academic Programs, Program for Postdoctoral Fellows in Education Research, and the Office of International Activities. The Center has been host to groups as diversified as the National Urban Coalition and the Senate Public Works Committee, while guests have included Nobel Prize winner Dr. Murray Gell-Mann; Dr. John Clark, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center; Dr. Robert Marston, Direc- tor of National Institutes of Health; Mr. Robert Mayo, Counsellor to the President; Mr. Elmer Staats, Comptroller General; Dr. John Gardner, Chairman, National Urban Coalition; and Commissioner Nicholas Johnson of the Federal Communications Commission, to name a few of the more than 1,000 persons who have been welcomed to Belmont this past year.
The editorial office, located in the Arts and Industries Building, is headed by Edward K. Thompson. Before coming to Washington, Mr. Thompson served for ten years as managing editor of Life magazine, after which he became editor of all Life publications. In this capacity he was largely responsible for launching a well-known Life books program.
With Mr. Thompson on the Board of Editors of Smithsonian are Ralph T. Backlund, formerly associate and managing editor of Horizon magazine ; R. Hobart Ellis, who has served as editor of various scientific publications, including Nucleonics, Nuclear Fusion, and Physics Today; Edward Parks, formerly editor of several magazines in Australia and associate director of the National Geographic's book department; and Mrs. Grayce P. Northcross, who has done research and reporting for Time, Life, and the United States Information Agency's America.
Early articles to attract national attention concerned the Crown- of- Thorns starfish infestation of Pacific coral reefs, the history of our volunteer armies, and a historical appraisal of women's rights move- ments. Smithsonian scientists and staff members contributing to Smithsonian included Dr. John Eisenberg of the National Zoological Park, James Weaver of the National Museum of History and Tech- nology's Division of Musical Instruments, and photographer Francis Greenwell of the National Museum of Natural History. In addition, Regent Crawford H. Greenewalt contributed an article, with his own photographs, on Birds of Paradise.
Reduced buying power of funds for the purchase of library materials heightened the importance of the Libraries' gift and exchange pro- gram. A new review process was organized and subject experts on the Libraries' staff selected over 5,000 items for retention from among the many items received this year. This effort was capped by a valuable gift of historical items in botany by Mr. Harry Lubrecht of New York City. Processing was begun of the rare books in the Dwight-Tucker ornithological collection and the task of recataloging the Department of Anthropology Library reached the halfway mark in 1970.
The Ford Foundation will continue to support rif as a Smithsonian activity through a renewal grant of $400,000 for the three-year period, 1970-1973. Policy guidance for rif is provided by a National Advisory Board composed of more than thirty distinguished Americans from many walks of life. The founder and chairman of rif is Mrs. Robert S. McNamara; Secretary Ripley serves ex officio as a member of the rif board.
Arts and Industries Building. A contract was awarded on 4 August 1969 to Mr. William Watts for the cleaning and restoration of the exterior of the building. Work was completed during November 1969.
The major single acquisition was The Artist's Father by Cezanne, a gift of Mr. Paul Mellon. Other important acquisitions include two Cubist paintings, Football Players by Albert Gleizes and Rush Hour, New York by Max Weber; The City from Greenwich Village by John Sloan; and drawings by Andrew Wyeth and van Dyck. Portrait of Mme. Caillebotte, by Renoir, was bequeathed by Angelika Wertheim Frink. The Gallery also received two American naive paintings from Colonel and Mrs. Edgar William Garbisch. Loans were made to 61 institutions in this country and abroad.
That same month saw the broadcast over the National Educational Television (net) network of "In Search of Rembrandt," which was made possible by a grant to the National Gallery by Mrs. Cordelia Scaife May. The hour-long program, produced by the Gallery, was narrated by James Mason. Net cameras recorded more than 600 Rembrandt paintings and drawings from some 100 museums through- out the world, some of which are part of the Gallery's collection. The
On 27 March 1970 President Nixon appointed a 57-member Advi- sory Committee on the Arts for the Center under the chairmanship of Mrs. J. Willard Marriott of Washington, D.C. On 26 May the Presi- dent appointed an additional 49 members to the Advisory Committee, which is provided for in the John F. Kennedy Center Act.
Presentation of a color sketch of the black-and-red woolen stage curtain for the Kennedy Center's Eisenhower Theater, a gift of the people of Canada. Left to right, Susan Eisenhower, granddaughter of Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower; Madame Mariette Rousseau-Vermette, designer of the stage curtain; Roger L. Stevens, Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Kennedy Center; the Honor- able Gerard Pelletier, Secretary of State of Canada; Mrs. Edward M. Kennedy, representing the Kennedy family.
John LaMontaine, the American composer, was commissioned to write a work for orchestra and organ for the opening season of the Center and first performance on the organ in the Concert Hall, it was announced on 28 January 1970. The work was commissioned by Mrs. Jouett Shouse, a Trustee of the Center and the donor of the Concert Hall's Aeolian Skinner organ. The theme for Mr. LaMontaine's com- position will be taken from the books of Henry Thoreau, Winter, Spring, Summer, and Autumn.
Dr. Murray Gell-Mann. Robert Andrews Millikan Professor of Theoretical Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena.
Mr. Elting E. Morison. Professor of History and Master, Timothy Dwight College, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
Dr. Rainer Zangerl. Field Museum of Natural History, Roosevelt Road and Lakeshore Drive, Chicago, Illinois.
K. E. Bruce Mrs. Morris Cafritz The Honorable Douglas Dillon Mr. Charles E. Eckles The Honorable and Mrs. John
Mr. Cornelius Van S. Roosevelt Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. P. A. B. Widener Mr. Christian A. Zabriskie Mr. and Mrs. Sidney S. Zlotnick
Peter Frelinghuysen Mr. W. E. Gathright Mr. and Mrs. Joseph T. Geuting, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. T. K. Glennan Mrs. Katharine Graham
Patterson Mr. Charles Emory Phillips Dr. and Mrs. Ernest G. Rafey Mr. James H. Ripley Mrs. John Farr Simmons Dr. and Mrs. T. Dale Stewart Mrs. Edward C. Sweeney Martha Frick Symington, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. J. A. Toro Mr. and Mrs. A. Buel Trowbridge Mr. and Mrs. William S. Weedon Mr. and Mrs. J. Burke Wilkinson Mr. and Mrs. Mark Winkler
Abbott Mr. and Mrs. Stanley N. Allan Mrs. Carol P. Banks Mr. and Mrs. Emanuel Boasberg III The Honorable Frances P. Bolton Mr. and Mrs. Paul C. Bruning Mrs. Linda C. Burgess Mr. John H. Burns Mr. and Mrs. Horace W. Busby, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Frank Caplan Miss Joan Collett Mr. and Mrs. B. C. Connelly Mrs. Chester Dale Captain and Mrs. Robert F. Doss Mrs. Albert H. Ely Commander and Mrs. William B.
Fisher Mrs. Julius Fleischmann Mr. John W. Galston Mr. and Mrs. Melvin Gelman Dr. and Mrs. Arthur Goldsmith Mrs. Nancy K. Gullett Mr. and Mrs. W. Averell Harriman Mr. and Mrs. Louis Hausman Mr. and Mrs. Randolph A. Hearst Dr. and Mrs. K. R. Henery Logan Mr. and Mrs. James H. Hughes Mr. and Mrs. James D. Hurd Mrs. George C. Keiser Mr. J. A. King Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Liggett Dr. and Mrs. Charles U. Lowe
Newell Mr. Estrada Raul Oyuela Miss Ruth Uppercu Paul Mrs. Duncan Phillips Mr. Donald H. Price Mrs. Albert J. Redway Dr. Michael J. Reilly Mr. R. D. Remley Mrs. John Barry Ryan Mr. and Mrs. Herbert Salzman Miss E. R. Saul
Dr. and Mrs. Saul Schwartzbach Mr. and Mrs. Richard R. Sigmon Mr. and Mrs. Douglas R. Smith Mr. and Mrs. Murray Socolof Mrs. Sally Sweetland Mr. and Mrs. E. Russell True, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Robert B. Watson Mrs. Orme Wilson Mrs. Leslie H. Wyman
Invertebrates) Frank R. Schwengel (Mollusks) I. G. Sohn (Crustacea) Donald F. Squires (Echinoderms) Gilbert L. Voss (Mollusks) Mrs. Mildred S. Wilson (Copepod
Walter L. Creese. The American imagery resulting from political action and how it influenced the formulation of the visual and esthetic environment over the last two hundred years, "History of the Effect of American Government on the American Arts from Washington's Time," with Dr. Wilcomb E. Wash- burn, American Studies Program, from 1 July 1969 to 30 June 1970.
John J. McCusker. Philadelphia shipping, 1722—1776; a statistical study, with Dr. Melvin H. Jackson, National Museum of History and Technology, from 1 September 1969 to 31 August 1970.
R. H. Ives Goddard III. Linguistics, ethnography, and ethnohistory of the Algonquin Indians, with Dr. William C. Sturtevant, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 August 1969 to 1 August 1970.
Irving I. Zaretsky. A social history of spiritualism in the San Francisco Bay Region, with Dr. William C. Sturtevant, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 September 1969 to 1 September 1970.
Penelope Williamson. Behavioral studies of foraging in starling flocks, with Dr. George Watson, National Museum of Natural History, from 15 September 1969 to 15 September 1970.
Zbigniew M. Gliwicz. Freshwater phytoplankton productivity; differential availability of different kinds of algae to various consuming organisms, with Dr. Martin H. Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 16 October 1969 to 16 October 1970.
Henry A. Hespenheide III. Ecology of tropical insectivorous birds and their prey, with Dr. Martin Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 July 1969 to 1 July 1970.
Bruce A. Miller. Ecology and systematics of Pacific and Western Atlantic Terebridae, with Dr. Peter Glynn, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 12 May 1970 to 11 March 1971.
Eugene S. Morton. Communication in birds, with Dr. Neal Smith, Smith- sonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 January 1970 to 1 January 1971.
John Conrao Ogoen. Ecology of inshore fishes, with Dr. Ira Rubinoff, Smith- sonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 September 1969 to 1 November 1970.
Uzi Ritte. Ecological and genetic adaptations of populations of the spiny rat, Proechimys semispinosus, to different climatic regimes, and Dr. Martin H. Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 September 1969 to 1 September 1970.
Eric S. Todd. Ecophysiology of some air-breathing gobiid and gobiesocid fishes, with Dr. Martin H. Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 September 1969 to 1 September 1970.
William C. Banta. Evolution of bryozoa as illustrated by the structure and development of the body wall, with Dr. Alan Cheetham, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 September 1969 to 1 September 1970.
Daniel B. Blake. Evolutionary and morphological relationships of paleozoic bryozoa, with Dr. Richard Boardman, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 September 1969 to 1 September 1970.
J. Stanley Cobb. Brain morphology and behavior of deep-sea fishes, with Dr. Robert Gibbs and Dr. Stanley Weitzman, National Museum of Natural His- tory, from 1 October 1969 to 1 October 1970.
Arthur L. Dahl. Ecological investigations of marine algae with computerized analysis of their habitats, with Dr. Mason Hale, National Museum of Natural History, from 15 September 1969 to 14 September 1970.
Desmond J. G. Griffin. Evolutionary relationsbips of decapod Crustacea, with Dr. Raymond Manning, National Museum of Natural History, from 19 January 1970 to 19 October 1970.
Stuart Landry, Jr. Evolution and relationships of rabbits and rodents, with Dr. Charles O. Handley, Jr., National Museum of Natural History, from 1 September 1969 to 1 September 1970.
James E. Morrow. Systematics of Alaskan White fishes and Charrs, with Dr. Robert Gibbs, National Museum of Natural History, from 18 September 1969 to 31 May 1970.
Shih-Chieh Shen. Systematic and morphologic studies of fishes, with Dr. Robert Gibbs, National Museum of Natural History, from 3 November 1969 to 31 October 1970.
Stanley Guralnick. Science education in nineteenth-century American col- leges, with Dr. Nathan Reingold, Joseph Henry Papers, from 1 August 1969 to 1 August 1970.
David J. Jeremy. The textile industry in England and the United States; a case study in transmission of a technology, with Dr. Philip Bishop, National Museum of History and Technology, from 18 August 1969 to 18 August 1970.
Carroll Pursell, Jr. Mobilization of American science and technology for World War I, with Dr. Nathan Reingold, Joseph Henry Papers, from 15 De- cember 1969 to 15 June 1970.
Peter Stechl. Biological and standardization of drugs, 1928-1940, with Dr. Sami Hamarneh, National Museum of History and Technology, from 23 June 1969 to 23 June 1970.
Tomas Feininger. Petrology of some Colombian and Ecuadorian Andean meta- morphic rocks, with Dr. George Switzer, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 September 1969 to 31 August 1970.
Ter-Chien Huang. Origin and nature of deep-sea sediments and sediment transport processes, with Dr. Daniel J. Stanley, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 January 1970 to 1 January 1971.
Anil Lyall. Studies of outer continental margin sediments near the Wilming- ton Canyon, with Dr. Daniel J. Stanley, National Museum of Natural His- tory, from 1 November 1969 to 1 July 1970.
Forese C. Wezel. Sediments on the continental rise in the vicinity of the Wilmington Submarine Canyon, eastern United States, with Dr. Daniel J. Stanley, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 November 1969 to 31 October 1970.
Faye Joanne Baker. A study of tombstones as a reflection of American culture, with Dr. Wilcomb E. Washburn, American Studies Program, from 1 Septem- ber 1969 to 1 September 1970, leading to the award of PhD from the George Washington University.
David K. Sullivan. Studies in the documentation of American political history in the United States, with Dr. Wilcomb E. Washburn, American Studies Program, from 1 September 1969 to 1 June 1970, leading to the award of PhD from Georgetown University.
Dorothy J. Morton. Developmental physiology of grass seedlings with special reference to effects of light on corn, with Dr. Robert Weintraub, Radiation Biology Laboratory, from 1 July 1969 to 31 December 1969, leading to the award of PhD from the George Washington University.
Mark H. Bernstein. The significance of "quirks" in captive primates, with Dr. Martin H. Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 September 1969 to 1 September 1970.
Robin B. Foster. Fruiting sequences in the tropical rainforest (schedules of food availability), with Dr. A. Stanley Rand, Smithsonian Tropical Research Insti- tute, from 1 September 1969 to 1 September 1970.
Chaim N. Kropach. Ecology and population structure of the eastern Pacific sea snake, with Dr. Ira Rubinoff, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 August 1969 to 1 August 1970.
Thomas M. Zaret. Seasonal variation in a tropical freshwater predator-prey relationship (Thyrionopsis: Ceriodaphnia), with Dr. Martin H. Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 July 1969 to 1 July 1970.
Jean T. DeBell. Electron microscopy of body wall structure of certain marine worms, with Dr. W. D. Hope, National Museum of Natural History, from 9 October 1969 to 9 October 1970, leading to the award of PhD from the George Washington University.
T. Gary Gautier. Morphological, stratigraphic and paleoecological relationship of the bryozoa of the West Texas Permian, with Dr. Richard S. Boardman, from 1 August 1969 to 31 July 1970, leading to the award of PhD from the University of Kansas.
Richard H. Goodyear. Systematic studies of deep-sea fishes (Malacosteidae), with Dr. Robert H. Gibbs, National Museum of Natural History, from 25 August 1969 to 25 August 1970, leading to the award of PhD from the George Washington University.
Walter S. Gray, Jr. Systematic and morphologic studies of Antarctic amphipod Crustacea, with Dr. J. L. Barnard, National Museum of Natural History, from 15 February 1970 to 15 February 1971, leading to the award of PhD from the George Washington University.
Lyndon Hawkins. Systematic and morphologic studies of the American brac- onid wasps, with Dr. Richard Froeschner, National Museum of Natural His- tory, from 1 November 1969 to 30 April 1970, leading to the award of PhD from the University of Idaho.
Robert W. Hinds. Evolutionary and morphological studies of fossil bryozoa of the Gulf Coast, with Dr. Richard S. Boardman, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 July 1969 to 1 September 1970, leading to the award of PhD from Columbia University.
Catherine J. Kerby. Ecology, histology, embryology, and systematics of marine worms, with Dr. Meredith Jones, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 August 1969 to 1 August 1970, leading to the award of PhD from the George Washington University.
Gerald R. Noonan. Systematics and zoogeographical relationships of coleop- teran beetles, with Dr. Paul J. Spangler, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 October 1969 to 30 September 1970, leading to the award of PhD from the University of California, Riverside.
John S. Peel. Comparative studies of British and American fossil gastropods, with Dr. Ellis Yochelson, National Museum of Natural History, from 8 Oc- tober 1969 to 8 October 1970, leading to the award of PhD from University of Leicester, England.
Robert Rorex. Lady Wun-Chi, a historical study, with Dr. Thomas Lawton, Freer Gallery of Art, from 1 September 1969 to 1 September 1970, leading to the award of PhD from Princeton University.
Kitti Thonglongya. Taxonomic revision of the bats of Thailand, with Dr. George Watson, National Museum of Natural History, from 8 September 1969 to 7 September 1970.
Leslie Ray Brady. Studies of atomic nuclear processes associated with produc- tion of sunshine and starlight, with Dr. Henri Mitler, Smithsonian Astrophysi- cal Observatory, from 1 July 1969 to 1 July 1970, leading to the award of PhD from Brandeis University.
Chung-Chieh Cheng. Theoretical studies of the flux and energy spectrum of gamma radiation from the sun, with Dr. G. G. Fazio, Smithsonian Astrophys-
Eric G. Chipman. Studies of outer layers of the sun, with Dr. E. H. Avrett, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1969 to 30 June 1970, leading to the award of PhD from Harvard University.
J. Stephen Duerr. Studies of the physical effects of outer space on meteorites, with Dr. Charles A. Lundquist, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1969 to 1 July 1970, leading to the award of PhD from the Massa chusetts Institute of Technology.
Jonathan E. Grindlay. Theoretical studies of cosmic ray origin, with Dr. G. G. Fazio, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1969 to 1 July 1970, leading to the award of PhD from Harvard University.
Robert L. Kurucz. Theoretical studies of particularly hot stars, with Dr. Wolfgang Kalkofen, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1969 to 30 June 1970, leading to the award of PhD from Harvard University.
Elia M. Leibowitz. Studies of dynamics and evolution of planetary nebulae, with Dr. Charles A. Lundquist, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1969 to 30 June 1970, leading to the award of PhD from Harvard University.
Joseph Veverka. Photopolarimetry of satellites and minor planets, with Dr. Fred Whipple, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1969 to 1 February 1970, leading to the award of PhD from Harvard University.
Cherry Deborah Maurer, Wells College. Urban design and transportation systems, with Dr. Wilcomb E. Washburn, American Studies.
Bryant Young, Yale University. Urban design and transportation systems, with Dr. Wilcomb E. Washburn, American Studies.
Karen Ann Larson, Raymond College. Research in Micronesian ethnohistory, with Dr. Saul H. Riesenberg, National Museum of Natural History.
Dr. A. Stanley Rand, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. Deborah Lee, Wells College. Physiology of tropical marine fishes, with Dr. Ira
Thomas L. Marzetta, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Research in electron microprobe laboratory instrumentation refinement activities, with Dr. William G. Melson, National Museum of Natural History.
George L. Mitchell, University of Chicago. The image of the city in Ameri- can silent film, with Dr. Wilcomb E. Washburn, American Studies Program.
Raymond P. DeMallie, University of Chicago. Studies in American Indian linguistics — Siouan groups, with Dr. Paul Voorhis and Margaret C. Blaker, National Museum of Natural History.
Jane I. Lumpkin, University of Alabama. Identification of artifacts from Thai- land and Pakistan, with Dr. Eugene I. Knez, National Museum of Natural History.
Jill Ellen Marshall, American University. Study of culture and population in Africa, with Dr. Gordon D. Gibson, National Museum of Natural History.
Yael Devora Dubin, University of Florida. Ecology and behavior of spiders, with Dr. Martin H. Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute.
Sana Isa Atallah, University of Connecticut. Mammals of the eastern Medi- terranean region : their ecology, systematics, and zoogeographical relationships, with Dr. Henry W. Setzer, National Museum of Natural History.
Douglas Nelson, University of South Carolina. Clay mineralogy of Atlantic project, with Dr. Jack W. Pierce, National Museum of Natural History.
Alfred R. Henderson. A biographical study of Dr. Charles Land and his role in the development of dentistry and medicine, with Dr. Robert P. Multhauf, National Museum of History and Technology, from 15 June 1969 to 15 June 1970.
Smithsonian Puppet Theatre To Give "Hansel and Gretel" 5-1-70 Mrs. Nixon Presents Inaugural Ball Gown to Smithsonian
In addition we played host to our first big assemblage of Amer- ican Indians organized by Mrs. Clydia Nahwooksy and George Kishketon, Cherokee and Kickapoo, respectively. Tribes represented included Comanches, Kiowas, Ponca, Ponca-Sioux, Kickapoo, Osage, Cheyenne, Kiowa-Choctaw and Arapaho. Crafts, music, and dance were all demonstrated.
The demonstrated interest of Mr. Thompson, well known in the country for his sponsorship of cultural and arts legislation, of Mr. Brademas, whose concern for education is equally well known, and of the other members of the subcommittee, Mr. Schwengel, Mr. Bingham, Mr. Harvey, and Mr. Crane, in our hearings, was a most welcome one, and we are indeed grateful for this oppor- tunity to be responsive to the Congress.
Construction contracts on a tight budget are always fearful and risky things to tamper with. Inflationary cost-increases in construc- tion threatened at one point to endanger the whole project, and we are additionally grateful to Mr. Hirshhorn for his generosity in adding a million dollars to our construction budget. With luck our schedule now assumes an opening of the Museum and Sculpture Garden in mid- 1973. Meanwhile President Nixon has named the eight public Trustees of the Gallery, together with two ex-officio Trustees.
Dr. Sadik organized two especially interesting exhibits at the National Portrait Gallery in what is fast becoming a remarkable tradition of style and scholarship. The first, organized by Andrew Oliver, displayed the portraits of John Quincy Adams (to whom the Smithsonian owes so much for his interest during his latter years as Congressman) . The second, the research on which was performed by Robert Stewart, exhibited the obscure 18th-century American portraitist, Henry Benbridge. Both were artistic triumphs.
On the other hand, the continued loss ($80,000) in our Museum Shops, although caused in large part by liquidation of large unsal- able inventories acquired in previous years, was most disappointing. The need for great business attention to the Shops and other sim- ilar activities has become abundantly clear. Effective in July 1971, Mr. Harry R. Albers has been given this responsibility by his ap- pointment as Business Manager, Office of the Treasurer.
In another field, gifts totaling $243,000 were contributed to- ward the important underwater research efforts centered at the Institution's new oceanographic center in Fort Pierce, Florida, at which will be based the Johnson-Sea-Link submarine and the /. Seward Johnson oceangoing submarine tender, contributed to the Institution by Mr. Edwin A. Link and Mr. J. Seward Johnson. These were in addition to the substantial income for this purpose
Increasing attention has been given to the monitoring of these funds in the past two years with the result that the Board of Regents appointed in September 1970 a new Investment Policy Committee consisting of the Secretary (ex-officio) , three Regents (Mr. William A. M. Burden, Chairman; Dr. Crawford H. Greene- wait; and Mr. James E. Webb) and four experienced investment executives (Messrs. Harold F. Linder, Donald Moriarty, Charles H. Mott, and William R. Salomon) . After reviewing the invest- ment problems of the Institution, the Board of Regents, on the recommendation of this Committee, has adopted a number of changes affecting our endowment funds. Effective 1 July 1971, three new investment management firms have been given the re- sponsibility for investing different portions of the funds. Discretion has been granted to the managers to carry out this responsibility, subject to general policy guidance and prompt reporting require- ments imposed by the Board.
County Mrs. Augustus Riggs iv Ralph Rinzler Mrs. Clifford Robertson Rubin Foundation, Inc. Sidney Printing and Publishing Co. Symonds Foundation E. W. Thaw and Co. John B. Trevor, Jr. Marcie Brady Tucker Foundation W. M. Underwood Co.
Midway through the fiscal year the Assistant Secretary (Science) Sidney R. Galler left the Smithsonian to become the Deputy Assist- ant Secretary for Environmental Affairs in the Department of Commerce. His five years service with the Institution was marked by a rapid rise in new science programs and he will be sorely missed. Dr. David Challinor, formerly Director of the Office of International Activities, has been serving as Acting Assistant Secretary (Science).
Workers, most of whom are volunteers from the United States, searching for artifacts on the Tell Jemmeh project, directed by Dr. Gus W*. Van Beek. From materials found thus far, the site is presumed to be an ancient palace.
Dr. Bruce B. Collette (seated) of NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service demonstrates to Mr. Edgar N. Gramblin, National Museum of Natural History, the removal of a flesh sample from a 30-year old skipjack tuna (Katsuiconus pelamis) from Peru for determination of levels to total mercury and methyl mercury. Specimens of tuna examined include some collected almost 100 years ago.
Mr. Frederick J. Collier, Collection Manager, consulting a computer listing of specimen data. These lists are used by Smithsonian scientists to locate quickly and easily specimens in the Museum's vast collections. The lists also are distrib- uted to interested scientists and serve to circulate widely information on the Museum's collections.
During fiscal year 1971, the Institution appointed Mr. Michael Collins Director of the National Air and Space Museum and Mr. Melvin B. Zisfein Deputy Director.
Mr. Collins came to the Institution from the Department of State where he had served as Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs and before that as an Air Force Colonel assigned to the space pro- gram where he participated as an astronaut in the Gemini 10 and Apollo 1 1 flights.
Mr. Zisfein comes from a career in air and space research having served as Associate Director of the Franklin Institute Research Laboratories, General Manager of the Astromechanics Research Division of the Conroe Corporation, and Chief of the Dynamics Department of Bell Aircraft Corporation.
During the past year the collections of two early American pilots, Blance Stuart Scott and Beckwith Havens, have been added to the holdings of the Historical Research Center, as well as a collection from an early Norwegian pilot, Mr. Sem-Jacobsen.
The crown-of-thorns starfish (Acanthaster planci), which has recently been so destructive to western Pacific coral reefs, has been the subject of continued study by Dr. Peter Glynn since his discovery of them in Central America in April 1970. Results show a stable population and that one large reef area, which was 80-percent con- sumed by Acanthaster had in large part been recolonized by young corals within a year. Dr. Glynn notes, however, that these reefs are free from human over-collecting, pollution, and coastal destruction, as well as from violent storms, all factors which have been cited as contributing to the devastation of western Pacific reefs.
Old World Tropics. Six members of our staff traveled to Europe, Asia, and Africa during the fiscal year in an effort to coordinate research programs with different institutions to encourage local scientists to pursue research projects in their areas. Dr. Moynihan made an extensive visit to establish contacts with various admini- strative officials and biologists at several educational and research institutions in the Ivory Coast, Madagascar, India, and New Guinea. As a result, stri has presented a substantial proposal for research in India using Public Law 480 funding.
Deputy Director Edward H. Kohn left stri in May to become a special assistant to Mr. Bradley. During Mr. Kohn's 30 months at stri, the bureau work force grew by 36 percent and the number of visitors increased by 39 percent. Mr. C. Neal McKinney joined the staff in February as administrative officer. Mr. McKinney's back- ground has been in personnel administration, most recently with the Environmental Protection Agency. In August, Dr. Judith Lang joined the staff. A specialist in deep water (slope) coral communities, she will continue to work primarily in Jamaica. In June, Dr. Hin- drik Wolda joined the staff. A specialist in population ecology, Dr. Wolda was a faculty member at the University of Groningen.
In March, a new Department of Zoological Programs was estab- lished, combining the animal exhibit divisions and the divisions of Scientific Research, Animal Health, and Pathology. The new post of Assistant Director for Zoological Programs was created. Dr. John Eisenberg was named Acting during the recruiting period.
Dr. Sam Weeks joined the staff as curator of birds and Mr. Harold Egoscue as curator of small mammals and primates.
In support of the submersible, the Smithsonian, in cooperation vith Mr. Link, and the Harbor Branch Foundation, has acquired md is developing a marine facility near Fort Pierce, Florida. Consist- ng of about 250 acres of land on the Indian River Inland Water- vay, the improvements include two warehouse buildings for main- enance of the submarine and for associated underwater activities. ^ laboratory building is under construction to house scientific in-
After the commissioning on 29 January 1971, submersible pilot John Fike and Florida Lieutenant Governor Thomas Adams, within the acrylic bubble, prepare for the launching of Johnson-Sea-Link from Mr. Edwin A. Link's vessel, Sea Diver.
In connection with the commissioning ceremonies for Johnson- Sea-Link, which were held on 29 January, Mr. Ripley awarded a newly established Smithsonian Institution medal to Mr. Link and to Mr. Seward Johnson, who had not only provided substantial support to the project but also gave an endowment for its operation.
Research, curatorial, and exhibition activities of the Freer Gallery of Art continued this year as in the past. We were all saddened by the death of Mrs. Agnes E. Meyer who was both a good friend and patron of the Gallery. Mrs. Meyer was born in New York City in 1887. During most of her lifetime she had a keen interest in Far Eastern art and published Chinese Painting as Reflected in the Thought and Art of Li-Lung-Mien in 1923. Mrs. Meyer first met Mr. Freer in January, 1913, and from that moment on their lives were closely allied in the search and study of Far Eastern art. Following Mr. Freer's death in 1919, Mrs. Mever continued to serve as an ad- visor and was mentioned in Mr. Freer's will as one of the five people who were permitted to make gifts of objects to the collection. Mrs. Meyer was the last living person officially associated with the Gallery who also knew Mr. Freer. During her lifetime and as part of her bequest, Mrs. Meyer greatly enriched the collection of the Freer Gallery of Art.
In the course of the year a committee known as the Visiting Com- mittee of the Freer Gallery of Art was established. It will be chaired by The Honorable Hugh Scott, Senator from Pennsylvania, and the other members are as follows: Laurence Sickman, Director, William Rockhill Nelson Gallery of Art; Mrs. Jackson Burke, collector; Chang Kwang-chih, Professor, Department of Anthropology, Yale University; Miss Edith Ehrman, Manager, Foreign Area Materials Center, State Education Department, University of the State of New York; Marvin Eisenberg, Professor, History of Art, University of Michigan; Mrs. Katharine Graham, Publisher, The Washington Post; John Rosenfield, Professor of Oriental Art, Harvard Univer- sity. They will meet regularly and serve in an advisory capacity.
The American Institute of Interior Designers has elected Mrs. Lisa Taylor, the director, to honorary membership. Mrs. Elaine Dee, curator of Prints and Drawings, and Mrs. Catharine Frangiamore, assistant curator of Decorative Arts, were awarded grants to partici- pate in international conferences abroad.
On 23 January 1971, Mr. Frank A. Taylor retired from the Smith- sonian Institution after forty-eight years of service. Engineer, lawyer, curator, museum administrator, and recipient of the Henry Medal, Mr. Taylor will continue to serve the Institution as a Research Associate, as a consultant to the Secretary for special projects, and as the Smithsonian's ambassador-at-large to the museum world.
The Office of Director General of Museums, with Mr. Taylor's retirement, now operates as the Office of Museum Programs. On 25 January 1971, Mr. Peter C. Welsh was appointed director of this office and charged with the supervision of the Office of Exhibits Programs, the Office of the Registrar, the Conservation-Analytical Laboratory, and the execution of programs under the National Museum Act.
Our Smithsonian guests have included the Smithsonian Council, the Interdisciplinary Communications Program, the Office of Aca- demic Programs, a pre-Symposium '70 seminar, and a meeting sponsored by the Anthropology Department. The Center has been host to groups as diversified as the U.S. Department of State and the Baltimore Mutual Investment Company, while guests have in- cluded Dr. Margaret Mead of the American Museum of Natural History; His Excellency Nobuhiko Ushiba, Ambassador from Japan; The Right Reverend Monsignor Bordelon of the U.S. Catholic Conference; Dr. Robert Marston, Director of the National Institutes of Health; Dr. M. C. Shelesnyak, Director of the Interdisciplinary
Communications Program; Ambassador Armin Meyer, American Ambassador to Japan; Dr. John Clark, Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center; Dean L. G. Cowan of the State University of New York; Sir Solly Zuckerman of the British Cabinet Office; James Kilpatrick, columnist; His Highness the Maharaja Gaekwar of Baroda; and Nobel Prize winner Dr. Murray Gell-Mann.
The Life Portraits of John Qidncy Adams, a catalog designed by Miss Crimilda Pontes, was chosen as one of the twenty-two outstand- ing design and production publications of the year by the Associa- tion of American University Presses. The exhibit of these twenty-two books will be sent to libraries, educational institutions, cultural centers, book fairs, and special graphic art events in Europe, Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Pre-schoolers at a "Reading Is Fundamental" day-care center in Washington, D.C., show their book choices to Mrs. Robert S. McNamara, RIF's Board Chair- man.
Some of the more notable exhibitions held at the Gallery were "Paintings and Sculpture from the Nathan Cummings Collection," "Mary Cassatt," "American Paintings from the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston and The Metropolitan Museum, New York," "British Painting and Sculpture 1960-1970," "Ingres in Rome," "Paintings by William Hogarth from the Collection of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon," and Diirer in America: His Graphic Work."
Roger L. Stevens, Chairman Richard Adler Floyd D. Akers Robert O. Anderson Ralph E. Becker** K. LeMoyne Billings Edgar M. Bronfman Mrs. Edward Cox* Robert W. Dowling Ralph W. Ellison Mrs. J. Clifford Folger*
Mrs. Michael J. Mansfield Sidney P. Marland, Jr. Harry C. McPherson, Jr. George Meany Robert I. Millonzi L. Quincy Mumford Senator Charles Percy Elliot Richardson John Richardson, Jr. S. Dillon Ripley, II Rep. Teno Roncalio Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr.
The National Symphony Orchestra, under the leadership of its distinguished new director Antal Dorati, will give its regular season of concerts in the Center, it was announced on 9 December. The Orchestra, under Mr. Dorati's direction, with Isaac Stern as soloist and the Paul Hill Chorale and the Washington Choral Arts Society, will open the Concert Hall on 9 September.
Israel will furnish and decorate the concert hall lounge with specially commissioned artworks illustrating the continuous bond between Judaism and music from Biblical times to the present. The gift was announced by Mrs. Yitzhak Rabin, wife of the Ambassador of Israel, on 29 April.
Officers at the close of the fiscal year are as follows: Mrs. Polk Guest, Chairman, Mrs. Norris Dodson, Jr., Vice Chairman, Mrs. Eugene C. Carusi, Secretary, and Mr. Henry Strong, Treasurer.
Research Institute, University of Texas, Austin. Mr. H. Harvard Arnason. Vice President for Art Administration, Solomon R.
Guggenheim Foundation, New York City. Dr. Herman R. Branson. President, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania. Professor Fred R. Egcan. Department of Anthropology, University of Chicago,
Washington, Seattle. Professor Anthony N. B. Garvan. Chairman, Department of American Civiliza- tion, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. Dr. Murray Gell-Mann. Robert Andrews Millikan Professor of Theoretical
Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena. Dr. Philip Handler. President, National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C. Professor G. Evelyn Hutchinson. Sterling Professor of Zoology, Yale University,
Sciences, New York University, New York City. Mr. Clifford L. Lord. President, Hofstra University, Hempstead, Long Island,
Meteoritic Specialist. Mr. Elting E. Morison. Professor of History and Master, Timothy Dwight Col- lege, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. Mr. Robert Motherwell. Distinguished Professor, Hunter College, New York
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. Mr. Gordon N. Ray. President, John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation,
New York City. Mr. Philip C. Ritterbush. Chairman, Organization Response, Washington, D.C. Mr. Andre Schiffrin. Managing Director, Pantheon Books, New York City. Professor Cyril Stanley Smith. Institute Professor, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge. Dr. John D. Spikes. College of Science, University of Utah, Salt Lake City. Professor Stephen E. Toulmin. Department of Philosophy, Michigan State
Dr. William von Arx. Senior Scientist, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, Massachusetts.
Dr. Rainer Zangerl. Field Museum of Natural History, Roosevelt Road and Lakeshore Drive, Chicago, Illinois.
Clifford Folger Mr. Cornelius Van S. Roosevelt Mr. Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Mr. P. A. B. Widener Mr. Christian A. Zabriskie (Deceased) Mr. and Mrs. Sidney S. Zlotnick
Foley Mr. T. Jack Gary, Jr. Mr. W. E. Gathright Mr. and Mrs. T. K. Glennan Mr. and Mrs. Charles C. Glover III Colonel and Mrs. Julius Goldstein Mrs. Katharine Graham Dr. Sheila H. Gray Mr. and Mrs. Homer Gudelsky Mr. Arthur A. Houghton, Jr. Miss Elisabeth Houghton Mrs. Edward F. Hutton Mr. David Lloyd Kreeger Mr. and Mrs. Anthony A. Lapham
Patterson Mr. Charles Emory Phillips Dr. and Mrs. Ernest G. Rafey Mr. James H. Ripley Mr. William H. Scully Mrs. John Farr Simmons Dr. and Mrs. T. Dale Stewart Mrs. Edward C. Sweeney Mrs. Mary Davidson Swift Martha Frick Symington, Inc. Mr. and Mrs. David G. Townsend Mr. and Mrs. A. Buel Trowbridge Mr. George C. Webster Mr. and Mrs. William S. Weedon Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Wilkinson, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Mark Winkler
Abbott Mr. and Mrs. Stanley N. Allan Mrs. Carol P. Banks Dr. and Mrs. Montgomery Blair Mr. Herbert Block Mr. and Mrs. Emanuel Boasberg III The Honorable Frances P. Bolton Mr. and Mrs. Philip Bonsai Mrs. Albert J. Bowley Mrs. Linda C. Burgess Mr. and Mrs. Horace W. Busby, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. Frank Caplan Mr. and Mrs. James G. Chandler Mr. and Mrs. David Sanders Clark Mrs. Chester Dale Captain and Mrs. Robert F. Doss Mr. and Mrs. Lionel Epstein Mrs. Julius Fleischmann The Honorable Peter Freylinghuysen Mr. John W. Galston Mr. and Mrs. Melvin Gelman Mr. and Mrs. Ernest W. Grove Mr. Tom Hart
Mr. and Mrs. Louis Hausman Mr. and Mrs. Randolph A. Hearst Mr. and Mrs. John W. Hechinger Mrs. Rex D. Hopper, Sr. Mr. H. T. Howard, Jr. Mr. and Mrs. James H. Hughes Mr. and Mrs. James D. Hurd Mrs. George C. Reiser Mr. J. A. King Miss N. P. Kuhn Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Liggett Dr. and Mrs. Charles U. Lowe Miss Katharine Magraw Mrs. Isabel C. Mahaffie Mr. and Mrs. Gershom R. Makepeace
George S. Robinson L. Wardlaw Hamilton Mrs. Suzanne D. Murphy Mrs. M. Malaro Special Projects, Office of the Secretary
Howard W. Lipham, Vice President Harold O. Love, Vice President Mrs. Otto L. Spaeth, Vice President Stanford C. Stoddard, Secretary-Treasurer Harry Baldwin Irving F. Burton Edmond duPont Joseph H. Hirshhorn James Humphry III Miss Milka Iconomoff Eric Larrabee Robert L. McNeil, Jr. Abraham Melamed Mrs. E. Bliss Parkinson Henry Pearlman Mrs. Dana M. Raymond Mrs. William L. Richards E. P. Richardson Chapin Riley Girard L. Spencer Edward M. M. Warburg James Wineman Willis F. Woods S. Dillon Ripley, ex officio Charles Blitzer, ex officio Lawrence A. Fleischman, Honorary Mrs. Edsel B. Ford, Honorary
Martin Friedman Lloyd Goodrich Walker Hancock Bartlett H. Hayes, Jr. August Heckscher Wilmarth S. Lewis Henry P. Mcllhenny Robert Motherwell Ogden M. Pleissner Charles H. Sawyer Mrs. Otto L. Spaeth George B. Tatum Otto Wittmann Alexander Wetmore Leonard Carmichael Gilmore D. Clarke Paul Mellon Stow Wengenroth Andrew Wyeth
Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson Mrs. Aristotle Onassis Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower Treasurer Emeritus Daniel W. Bell
His Graphic Work. Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art, 1971. Watson, Ross. William Hogarth: Paintings from the Collection of Mr. & Mrs.
Leonard P. Curry. Roots of American urbanism, 1800-1850, with Dr. Wilcomb Washburn, American Studies Program, from 15 August 1970 to 14 August 1971.
James T. Rauh. An investigation of the structure of the Borgia group of manu- scripts, with Dr. Clifford Evans, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 December 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Mario Jose Sanoja. Ecology and cultural areas in pre-Columbian Venezuela, with Dr. Clifford Evans, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 Sep- tember 1970 to 31 August 1971.
David Gentry Steele. A re-evaluation of the within-group variation of the family Tupaiidae, with Dr. Lawrence Angel, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Clarke Brooks. Analysis of algal biliproteins, with Dr. Elizabeth Gantt, Ra- diation Biology Laboratory, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Jack H. Burk. Production and energy status of deciduous tree species with regard to annual cycle of energy utilization and standing crop, with Dr. Francis S. L. Williamson, Chesapeake Bay Center for Environmental Studies, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Stephen I. Rothstein. An experimental investigation of host preferences in the brown-headed cowbird, with Dr. Francis S. L. Williamson, Chesapeake Bay Center for Environmental Studies, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Penelope Williamson. Foraging behavior of the starling, Sturnus vulgaris, with Dr. George Watson, National Museum of Natural History, from 15 September 1970 to 14 September 1971.
Dr. Martin Moynihan, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 1 No- vember 1970 to 30 April 1971. Jeffrey B. Graham. Studies in the biology of the amphibious clinid, Mnierpes
O. Sylvester Adegoke. Tertiary paleontology of southern Nigeria and ecology and distribution of living Foraminifera in the Gulf of Guinea, with Dr. Richard Cifelli, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 August 1970 to 31 July 1971.
Arnfried Antonius. Occurrence and distribution of stony corals in Venezuelan waters, with Dr. Klaus Ruetzler, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 August 1970 to 31 July 1971.
James A. Doyle. Studies on angiosperm pollen and megafossils of the Potomac Group (Cretaceous) of Maryland and Virginia, with Dr. Leo J. Hickey, Na- tional Museum of Natural History, from 1 October 1970 to 30 September 1971.
Ter-chien Huang. Deep sea sedimentation in the western Mediterranean Sea, with Dr. Daniel Stanley, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 Jan- uary 1970 to 1 January 1971.
Jerry A. Powell. Biosystematic study of Neotropical Sparganothidini (Lepidop- tera: Tortricidae) , with Dr. Donald Duckworth, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Sandra S. Herbert. Erasmus Darwin's materialistics physiology and its impor- tance for his grandson Charles' discovery of evolution through natural selec- tion, with Dr. Audrey Davis, National Museum of History and Technology, from 1 June 1970 to 31 May 1971.
John J. Gurney. Electron microprobe studies of kimberlite and its associated ultrabasic xenoliths, with Dr. Brian Mason, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 November 1970 to 31 October 1971.
Lawrence N. Mertz. Development of astronomical instrumentation, with Dr. N. P. Carleton, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Jeffrey Taylor. Petrological and chemical research on lunar samples and theoretical interpretation and research on the metallic minerals in chondritic meteorites, with Dr. John Wood, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Martha E. Doty. Popular images of the American Indian, with Dr. Wilcomb Washburn and Mr. Richard Ahlborn, American Studies Program, from 1 January 1971 to 30 June 1971.
William B. Floyd. An historical study of Thomas Sully, with Dr. Wilcomb Washburn, American Studies Program, from 1 July 1970 to 31 June 1971.
Rayna D. Green. The Image of the Indian in the popular imagination, with Dr. Wilcomb Washburn, American Studies Program, and Dr. Sam Stanley, Center for the Study of Man, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Yvonne M. Lange. Santos, the wooden household saints of Puerto Rico, with Mr. Richard Ahlborn, American Studies Program, from 1 August 1970 to 31 July 1971.
Peter H. Smith. The Great American Wheel Conspiracy: Hoopes Bros, and Darlington, 1890-1920, with Mr. Robert Vogel, National Museum of History and Technology, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Arthur Townsend. Pattern and change in the material culture of Junction City, Kansas, between 1888 and 1922, as seen through the life and lens of Joseph Judd Pennell, photographer, with Dr. Wilcomb Washburn, American Studies Program, from 1 September 1970 to 1 June 1971.
Iraida Vargas. Aboriginal cultural development in eastern Venezuela and their relationships with the Lesser Antilles, with Dr. Clifford Evans, National Mu- seum of Natural History, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Christen E. Wemmer. Behavioral concomitants of morphology and the rela- tionship of the form-function complex to social organization and habitat utilization, with Dr. John Eisenberg, National Zoological Park, from 1 July 1970 to 31 July 1971.
A. Ross Kiester. Studies on the ecology and social behavior of Panamanian Gecko, Gonatodes albogularis, with Dr. A. Stanley Rand, Smithsonian Tropi- cal Research Institute, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
John E. McCosker. Substrate preferences and comparative functional morphol- ogy of eels of the family Ophichthidae, with Dr. Ira Rubinoff, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, from 15 August 1970 to 14 August 1971.
William B. Ramirez. Ecological relationships and specificity between fig wasps (Agaonidae) and Ficus, with Dr. Robert Dressier, Smithsonian Tropical Re- search Institute, from 1 October 1970 to 30 September 1971.
David R. Budge. Study of late Ordovician and Silurian rocks and their con- tained coral fauna in the eastern Great Basin, with Dr. William S. Oliver, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Anne C. Cohen. Geographic variation and sexual dimorphism in the squid Loligo pealei, living from Canada to Columbia near the continental shores of western north Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico, with Dr. Clyde Roper, National Mu- seum of Natural History, from 15 August 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Jean T. DeBell. Electron microscopy of the body wall of Macracanthorhynchus hirudinaceus (Acanthocephala) , with Dr. W. Duane Hope, National Museum of Natural History, from 9 October 1969 to 9 October 1971.
Theodore Gary Gautier. Cryptostome Bryoza from the Permian (Leonardian) of the Glass Mountains, Texas, with Dr. Richard S. Boardman, National Mu- seum of Natural History, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Walter Scott Gray. Studies of Antarctic Gammaridea (Amphipoda) , par- ticularly the families Eusiridae, Calliopiidae, and Pleustidae, with Dr. J. L. Barnard, National Museum of Natural History, from 15 February 1970 to 14 February 1971.
Eckart Hakansson. The free-living Cheilostomata from the White Chalk of Denmark, with Dr. Alan Cheetham, National Museum of Natural History, from 15 October 1970 to 14 October 1971.
Catherine J. Kerby. A life history study of the polychaetous annelid, Sabella microphthalma, with Dr. Meredith L. Jones, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 August 1970 to 31 July 1971.
Miloslav Kovanda. Preparation of a monographic electronic data bank of Campanula section Heterophylla, with Mr. Stanwyn Shetler, National Museum of Natural History, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Jackson Lewis. A study of genus Calappa (Decapoda: Oxystomata) as repre- sented by recent species in the United States National Museum collections and by Miocene fossils from Florida, with Dr. Fenner A. Chace, Jr., National Mu- seum of Natural History, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Shelley Fletcher. Pigment analysis of the American painting collection at the National Collection of Fine Arts, with Mr. Charles Olin, NCFA Conserva- tion Laboratory, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
William D. Morgan. Henry Vaughan, 1845-1917, Gothic revival architect, with Dr. Joshua C. Taylor, National Collection of Fine Arts, from 15 January 1971 to 30 June 1971.
Richard N. Murray. A study of figurative mural painting, public and private in the United States, 1890-1920, with Dr. Joshua C. Taylor, National Collec- tion of Fine Arts, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Phylis North. Max Weber paintings, 1905-1920, with Dr. Joshua C. Taylor, National Collection of Fine Arts, from 1 January 1971 to 30 June 1971.
Christine S. Schloss. Study of the 18th-century American primitive painters, with Dr. Joshua C. Taylor, National Collection of Fine Arts, from 1 September 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Stephen Cooper. History of American science and technology with emphasis on interrelationships between science and government, with Dr. Nathan Rein- gold, Joseph Henry Papers, from 1 August 1970 to 31 July 1971.
Barbara Kaplan. The relevance of alchemical and hermetic ideas to 13th and 14th century medicine in western Europe, with Dr. Sami Hamarneh, National Museum of History and Technology, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
John Richard Kerwood. The editing of documentary sources in American His- tory, with Dr. Nathan Reingold, Joseph Henry Papers, from 1 September 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Sally G. Kohlstedt. The American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1840 to 1860; the formation of a national scientific community, with Dr. Nathan Reingold, Joseph Henry Papers, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Joan W. Mishara. Conservation studies of metals, particularly metallic objects of art, with Mr. Robert Organ, Conservation Analytical Laboratory, from 1 July 1970 to 31 January 1971.
Richard Pruitt. Pictorial and bibliographical studies of Black American nota- bles, with Dr. Sidney Kaplan, National Portrait Gallery, from 1 September 1970 to 1 July 1971.
Jon Allen Seger. A long-range plan for the "third generation" of exhibits in the National Museum of Natural History, with Mr. Nathaniel Dixon from 21 September 1970 to 20 September 1971.
Elaine F. Sloan. Studies of the collection development policies of the Smith- sonian Institution Libraries, with Dr. Russell Shank, Smithsonian Institution Libraries, from 1 September 1970 to 1 June 1971.
Robert N. Works. Studies in museum administration and in the history of American art, with Mr. Marvin Sadik, National Portrait Gallery, from 1 September 1970 to 31 August 1971.
Duane F. Carbon. Theoretical studies of non-gray model atmosphere for stars of intermediate and late spectral types, with Dr. Owen J. Gingerich, Smith- sonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1970 to 30 January 1971.
Eric G. Chipman. Formation of spectral lines in the solar atmosphere, with Dr. E. H. Avrett, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
J. Stephen Duerr. Formation of plessite in metallic meteorites, with Dr. Charles A. Lundquist, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
James Elliott. Investigation of atmospheric fluorescence as a means of detecting transient X-ray phenomena from cosmic sources, with Dr. G. G. Fazio, Smith- sonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 September 1970 to 30 June 1971.
William R. Forman. Study of magnetic field structure in the Crab Nebula, with Dr. R. B. Southworth, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 September 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Jonathan E. Grindlay. Studies of high energy cosmic gamma rays and cosmic X-rays and their respective air showers, with Dr. G. G. Fazio, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Robert L. Kurucz. Studies in model atmospheres, with Dr. Wolfgang Kalkofen, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Elia Leibowitz. The emission spectrum of heavy ions in planetary nebulae, with Dr. Leo Goldberg, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971.
Douglas D. Nelson. Clay mineralogy and sedimentation of the Outer Banks, North Carolina, with Dr. J. W. Pierce, National Museum of Natural History, from 15 September 1970 to 14 September 1971.
Beth Michele Grosvenor, Mount Holyoke College. Research in political slo- gans in 19th century presidential campaigns, with Dr. Wilcomb Washburn, Office of American Studies.
Katherine Cora Hancock, Mills College. Studies of costumes in the Annapolis area during the 18th century, with Mrs. Claudia Kidwell, National Museum of History and Technology.
Catherine Mary Scholten, University of California at Berkeley. Bibliographic and documentary studies, with Mr. Richard Ahlborn, National Museum of History and Technology.
Judith Lynn Bishop, University of California at Davis. Literature research concerning drug immobilization in exotic animals, with Dr. Clinton W. Gray, National Zoological Park.
Dr. Thomas Soderstrom, National Museum of Natural History. George Joseph Divoky, Michigan State University. A study of the seasonal
Diane Lynn Arkin, University of Chicago. Studies in 19th century landscape painting in America, with Dr. Joshua Taylor, National Collection of Fine Arts.
Catherine Beth Lippert, University of Michigan. Study of American painting 1900-1904, with Dr. Joshua Taylor, National Collection of Fine Arts.
Judith Ann Calvert, University of California at Berkeley. Research and bibli- ography on the stylistic origins of Shaker furniture, with Mr. Carl Alexander, National Museum of History and Technology.
Caroline Levert Mastin. University of Delaware. Research participation and studies of special exhibits, with Mr. Peter C. Welsh, U.S. National Museum.
Carolyn Louise Rusch, Sweet Briar College. Studies relating to methods of conservation of museum objects including documentation, with Mr. Robert Organ, National Museum of History and Technology.
Dr. Roy Strong To Speak at National Portrait Gallery Smithsonian Sales Exhibit To Feature Georgia Crafts A Smithsonian Entomologist Probes Origins of South Pacific's
Social Identity Dr. Cyril Smith To Speak on Metallurgy and History Yvonne Rainer Dance Troupe To Perform at Smithsonian Rudolf Kelterborn To Lecture on Contemporary Swiss Music Openings of Christmas Sales-Exhibitions at Museum Shops of
Fine Arts Hubel Appointed Director of Smithsonian Press Rare Collection of Earthenware To Go on Display November 13 Dr. Scanlon To Give Lecture on Chinese Pottery in Egypt Dutch Officer To Give Lecture on Aviation Archaeology Project Note To Editors — Rube Goldberg Press Preview Rising Ethnic Consciousness Alters "Melting Pot" Concept Historian Cites Role of "Myths" in Nation's Cultural Development
Century Landscape Painter Dr. Pennington To Demonstrate Ornamentation of Messiah Solos Left Bank To Present Trumpeter Lee Morgan Lewis Mumford Will Receive Smithsonian's Hodgkins Medal NCFA Will Show 65 Drawings and Sculptures by Paul Manship National Portrait Gallery Acquires Rare Painting of President
Joseph H. Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden. Interviews: Roy Strong, Director of the National Portrait Gallery, London; Dr.
Paul Garber, Air and Space Historian: "The Art of Kites." Dr. J. Lawrence Angel, Physical Anthropologist: "Working With Prehistoric
Lucy Kavaler, author of "Freezing Point": "She Ventured in the Cold"; Dr. Gordon Gibson, Curator of Old World Anthropology: "Scientific Safari."
Dr. Lee Talbot, of the President's Council on Environmental Quality: "Environ- ment: What Are You Doing?"; Dr. Joshua Taylor, Director of the National Collection of Fine Arts: "What Have We Created?"